0	Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL.
1	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
3	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
4	This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers. Stage 2 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 2A and 2B dMMR/MSI-H cancers, but may be given for some stage 2C dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for some stage 2 pMMR/MSS cancers. It is most helpful for cancers with a high risk of recurrence (returning after treatment). Your doctor will consider the features and risk factors of the cancer to determine if recurrence is likely. If chemotherapy is planned, recommended regimens include capecitabine and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/leucovorin. These are given for 6 months. FOLFOX and CAPEOX are recommended options for high-risk cancers. FOLFOX is given for 6 months; CAPEOX for 3 months. Side effects Systemic therapy kills both cancer cells and healthy cells. The damage to healthy cells can cause hair loss, cracked skin, mouth sores, and other side effects. Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting.
5	Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on supportive care is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Stage 3 Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for all stage 3 colon cancers. Preferred regimens include CAPEOX and FOLFOX. Other recommended options include capecitabine and 5-FU. Chemotherapy is typically given for 3 to 6 months. The length of treatment depends on the regimen and the risk of recurrence. Surveillance Follow-up testing is started when there are no signs of cancer after treatment. It can help find new cancer growth early. Stage 1 A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery for stage 1 cancers. If the results are normal, your next colonoscopy should be in 3 years, and then every 5 years. If a concerning or high-risk adenoma is found, your next colonoscopy will be needed within 1 year. If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis.
6	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
7	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
8	Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss. About kidney cancer The kidneys How the kidneys work Kidney cancer RCC subtypes How kidney cancer spreads Key points The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. The kidneys make hormones and filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. This chapter will discuss the kidneys and provide an overview of kidney cancer. The kidneys The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. Each kidney is about the size of an adult’s fist. The kidney is covered by a thin layer of tissue, like the skin of an apple. This layer of tissue is called the renal capsule. Renal refers to the kidney. The kidneys are part of the urinary system. The urinary system is a group of organs that remove waste from the body in the form of urine (or pee). This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure.
9	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
10	It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Stomach cancer can also grow inwards and form an ulcer or masses that can cause symptoms. Stomach cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the stomach. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Those with stomach cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small (2 centimeters or less) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer has invaded other layers of the stomach wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near the stomach. Metastatic stomach cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, abdominal lining (peritoneum), and distant lymph nodes. It may also spread to the lungs or bone.
11	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
12	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
13	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
14	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
15	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
16	It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below. Resection (surgery) EBRT Ablative therapies Ablative therapies destroy cancerous lesions with little harm to nearby tissue. They are often delivered using a specially designed needle (a probe or electrode) placed directly into or next to the tumor. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT that may be used to treat tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone. Only a few treatment sessions are needed. If treatment with the local therapies listed above is complete, systemic therapy may follow. Systemic therapy Metastatic cervical cancer is usually treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. If you had prior treatment with cisplatin, it may not work as well again on its own. In this case, it is often given with 1 or 2 other medicines, as part of a combination regimen. A factor your doctor will consider when selecting a systemic therapy regimen to use first (as “first-line” therapy) is whether the cancer has the PD-L1 biomarker. At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen.
17	Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days. Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammography or 3-dimensional (3D) mammograms known as tomosynthesis. might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans.
18	It’s considered a form of cancer. Your blood contains several types of blood cells. One of those is white blood cells. B cells, also called B lymphocytes, are one type of white blood cell. They’re made within the soft, spongy tissue inside most of your bones called bone marrow. When they've matured properly, B cells leave your bone marrow to work in your bloodstream. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells.
19	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
20	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
21	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
22	Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. ECOG PS The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In breast cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Key points Tests are used to find cancer, plan treatment, and check how well treatment is working. You will have a physical exam, including a breast exam, to see if anything feels or looks abnormal.
23	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
24	A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others.
25	These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. However, it’s important to know that a biopsy doesn’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop an abnormal change (mutation). A mutation is when something is different in your genes than in most other people’s genes. Sometimes an abnormal change can cause a gene to make the wrong type of protein or make no protein at all. This abnormality could affect the cell, which may in turn cause a disease such as cancer. Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells.
26	About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
27	Plus, new and improved ways to detect and treat bladder cancer are helping people live longer and with fewer side effects than ever before. Experts predict that treatment will improve rapidly over the next few years, with better results for all stages of bladder cancer. As a result of clinical trials, many new treatments for bladder cancer have been approved or are on the horizon. As always, you can try to join a clinical trial at almost any point during cancer care. Key points Bladder cancer happens when abnormal cells in the inner layer of the bladder grow out of control. The most common symptom of bladder cancer is blood in the urine. Bladder cancer comes from abnormal changes (mutations) in the genes of cells. Smoking is the greatest risk factor for bladder cancer. Many bladder cancers can be cured. All bladder cancers can be treated. For most people with bladder cancer, treatment requires more than one type of therapy. Bladder cancer very often comes back even after treatment. You and your care team will need to watch for its return for potentially the rest of your life. 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life!
28	This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts. However, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Unlike other cancers of organs, like lung cancer or breast cancer, AML does not have stages. Many cancers spread from the location where they originate, and the extent or severity of cancer is determined by how far it has spread. AML arises from the bone marrow, which is present in nearly all of our bones. Because AML cells arise from multiple bones and flow in the blood all over the body, traditional staging is not useful. Instead, AML testing looks for specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes, which can tell your care team how aggressive your leukemia might be. Possible tests and procedures can be found in Guide Information on possible tests and procedures can be found in this chapter. You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you.
29	A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. PET/CT scan of prostate cancer This image combines PET and CT scans to show a cross-section of a patient’s pelvis. The greenish circle identifies cancer in the prostate, while the intense red dot indicates cancer that has spread to a pelvic lymph node. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, or other health problems. Biopsy Although a high PSA level and an abnormal digital rectal exam are signs of possible prostate cancer, the only way to confirm cancer is to have a biopsy. A biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of cells or tissue is removed from your body and tested for cancer. A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk.
30	AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found.
31	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
32	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
33	Gliomas can be challenging to treat, but treatment is improving. What is a glioma? A glioma is a type of tumor that grows in the brain. A tumor is an abnormal growth of cells. Gliomas develop from certain brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells (neurons) in the central nervous system (the brain and the spinal cord). Many types of tumors can occur in the central nervous system. Only those that start as glial cells become gliomas. Gliomas are the most common type of malignant (cancerous) brain tumor in adults. Gliomas can happen at any age but occur more often in adults than in children. Gliomas start in the brain or sometimes the spinal cord. But they rarely spread to another area of the body. What makes gliomas so complicated is that they invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. So gliomas can be very difficult to treat without harming the healthy parts of the brain. Normal cells vs. cancer cells Normal cells follow the body’s rules. Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules.
34	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
35	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
36	If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus.
37	Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment.
38	Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord. Primary CNS lymphoma occurs more often in the brain than in the spinal cord, but it can also involve the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Lymphoma – Lymphoma is cancer that forms from lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. So, a lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth of lymphocytes. Now let’s put it all together: Primary CNS lymphoma is a cancer that begins when lymphocytes in the brain and spinal cord grow out of control. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in lymphocytes in the immune system. The immune system is your body’s natural defense against infection and disease. Having an impaired immune system may increase the risk of developing this cancer. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas within the nervous system. For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body.
39	A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well.
40	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
41	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
42	Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. Usually in ALL, there are too many abnormal white blood cells (lymphoblasts). How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very immature to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. After a blood stem cell develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
43	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
44	You will have a physical exam, including a breast exam, to see if anything feels or looks abnormal. Treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. h A diagnostic mammogram includes detailed pictures of both breasts. It is different than a screening mammogram. During a biopsy, tissue or fluid samples are removed for testing. Samples are needed to confirm the presence of cancer and to perform cancer cell tests. A sample from a biopsy of your tumor will be tested for estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, HER2 status, and grade (histology). This provides information about the behavior of your cancer, as well as treatments to which your cancer may respond. About 1 out of 10 breast cancers are hereditary. Depending on your family history or other features of your cancer, your health care provider might refer you for hereditary genetic testing or to speak with a genetic counselor. h A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node(s) that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor.
45	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
46	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
47	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
48	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
49	 See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, it is called “regional” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 4 for more information on regional CSCC. Kno“wing there is treatment available gave me hope at diagnosis and for the future. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is most commonly caused by getting sunburns or spending too much time in the sun over many years. h An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin that has a higher chance of becoming squamous cell skin cancer. You may be more likely to get squamous cell skin cancer if you have actinic keratoses, a weakened immune system, or certain genetic syndromes. Squamous cell skin cancer can form in old wounds, burns, or scars. This is called Marjolin’s ulcer and it can be harder to treat. Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer.
50	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
51	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
52	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
53	About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
54	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
55	About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
56	If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most smokers. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your doctor about counseling and medicines that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco High-risk or very high-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for high-risk or very high-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA (preferred for very high-risk CSCC) Standard surgical excision If you are not a candidate for surgery, see If surgery is not an option on the next page. Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes.
57	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
58	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
59	Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus.
60	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
61	Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer hasn't already started to form. For more information on finding polyps early, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum is the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. Most rectal cancers start in polyps called adenomas. These cancers are called adenocarcinomas. 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter discusses testing and other steps needed to create your treatment plan. Mismatch repair testing Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker.
62	Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer. As a result, today’s treatments work Small cell lung cancer cells appear small and blue when viewed with a microscope. better than treatments in the past. Also, many people with cancer have more than one treatment option. The two most common types of lung cancer are: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), further divided into: • Adenocarcinoma • Squamous cell carcinoma • Adenosquamous carcinoma • Large cell carcinoma • Sarcomatoid carcinoma Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), further divided into: • Small cell carcinoma • Combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinoma The names of the cancers refer to their appearance under a microscope. When viewed with a microscope, SCLCs appear small and blue. Sometimes lung tumors contain both small cell and non-small cell lung cancer cells. These are called combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinomas and are usually treated like small cell lung cancer. SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book.
63	A history of smoking Having given birth more than once (called “high parity” or multiparity) Oral contraceptive (birth control) use Being sexually active at an early age A high number of sexual partners A history of sexually transmitted infection Certain autoimmune diseases A weakened immune system due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, for example Types of cervical cancer Most cervical cancers start in the ectocervix. The ectocervix is lined with squamous cells. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called a squamous cell carcinoma. About 2 out of 10 cervical cancers form in the endocervical canal. The endocervix is lined with cells that make mucus. These cells are referred to as glandular, gland-like, secretory, or columnar cells. Cancers that form in glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. Less commonly, the cancer may contain both squamous and adenocarcinoma cells. These cancers are referred to as adenosquamous carcinomas. They are sometimes called “mixed” tumors. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
64	Urine drains from the kidneys and ureters, passes through the tube, and exits the body through the stoma. Urine can trickle out of the stoma at any time. A small disposable bag is attached to the outside of your abdomen to collect the urine when it comes out of the stoma. This is called an ostomy bag (or ostomy pouch). The bag is attached to your body with the help of an adhesive ring. The ring sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Most people find that they need to empty the bag every 2 to 4 hours, depending on how much liquid they drink. A closable spout at the bottom of the bag allows the urine to be emptied into a toilet without taking off the bag. Neobladder For this procedure, the bladder is replaced with a segment of small intestine that acts like a new bladder (neobladder). Like the original bladder, this substitute bladder is attached to the ureters at one end and to the urethra at the other end. This means that urine follows the same path out of the body it normally would if you still had your bladder.
65	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
66	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
67	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
68	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
69	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
70	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
71	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
72	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
73	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
74	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
75	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
76	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
77	Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, the care team might include the following: h A diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, ultrasounds, and other imaging tests. An interventional radiologist performs needle biopsies and places intravenous (IV) ports for treatment. A pathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. A surgical oncologist performs operations to remove cancer. h A reconstructive (plastic) surgeon performs breast reconstruction, if desired, for those who undergo mastectomy. A medical oncologist treats cancer in adults using systemic therapy. h A radiation oncologist prescribes and delivers radiation therapy to treat cancer. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you do not feel pain during surgery or procedures. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant.
78	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
79	If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made.
80	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
81	Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive can also be used to describe therapy that may be stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier and perhaps more often than what’s recommended for other males. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to cause prostate cancer or to prevent it. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Smoking and obesity also increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. On the other hand, those who eat more fruits and vegetables have a lower risk of developing advanced prostate cancer. Exercise and maintaining a healthy weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate.
82	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
83	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
84	Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer. They include: An ultrasound (US) An alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test An ultrasound is a test that uses sound waves to take pictures of the inside of the body. A blood test checks for the protein AFP. An elevated or rising AFP might be a sign of primary liver cancer. This is cancer that starts in the liver. Follow-up steps after a screening ultrasound may include: If AFP is elevated or an ultrasound finds nodules that are 10 millimeters (mm) or larger, then you will have more tests. Nodules are small, round areas of tissue. Not all nodules are cancer. h If an ultrasound finds nodules that are smaller than , repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 3 to 6 months. If an ultrasound is negative, repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 6 months. Key points The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer.
85	The NCCN Guidelines are a work in progress that may be redefined as often as new significant data become available. NCCN makes no warranties of any kind whatsoever regarding its content, use, or application and disclaims any responsibility for its application or use in any way. NCCN Foundation seeks to support the millions of patients and their families affected by a cancer diagnosis by funding and distributing NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN Foundation is also committed to advancing cancer treatment by funding the nation’s promising doctors at the center of innovation in cancer research. For more details and the full library of patient and caregiver resources, visit NCCN.org/patients. About Hodgkin lymphoma What is lymphoma? What is the lymphatic system? Types of Hodgkin lymphoma 8 What can you do to get the best care? Hodgkin lymphoma is a highly curable cancer that usually starts in lymph nodes in the upper body. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 15 to 30, or after age What is lymphoma? Lymphoma is cancer that begins when white blood cells called lymphocytes grow out of control. Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers.
86	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
87	The pattern that accounts for the secondlargest area is given the second number. Add these two numbers together and you get a Gleason score. For example: pattern pattern Gleason score of 7 A Gleason score represents how much your biopsy sample looks like normal prostate tissue. It also estimates how aggressive your prostate cancer is—how quickly it might grow and whether it will spread. A higher Gleason score means the cancer is more likely to grow and spread quickly than a cancer with a lower Gleason score. Gleason scores range from 6 to 10, where 6 is the lowest score. A Gleason score of 7 is intermediate-grade, and 8 to 10 is high-grade. This can be confusing because 6 seems like it would be a medium score, not a low score. So to make Gleason scores simpler to use, they can be organized into Grade Groups. Grade Groups A Grade Group is a way to interpret a Gleason score. There are five Grade Groups, numbered 1 to The higher the Grade Group, the more aggressive the cancer. So cancer with a Gleason score of 6 is assigned as Grade Group 1 to show that it is the lowest score.
88	To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests. Although you may not receive all of them, let’s look at each of these assessment tools in turn: Risk groups Your care team will look at the clinical characteristics of your cancer, such as your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, biopsy results, and other test results. From this information, your providers can classify your disease into one of five different risk groups, from very low risk to very high risk. Why do you need to know your risk group? Because your risk group is the basis for your prognosis. A prognosis predicts the likely course and outcome of a disease. Your prognosis guides your treatment options. For example, patients with lower risk generally get minimal treatment or no treatment at all. Patients with higher risk usually get more aggressive treatment. Test results and calculations—PSA level, Grade Group, tumor stage, and biopsy results—are put together to determine your risk group. PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer.
89	However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer.
90	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
91	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
92	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
93	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
94	They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration. Lung cancers form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The lungs' airways are called the bronchus, bronchioli, and alveoli. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. They break the rules of cell growth. Cancer cells make many new cancer cells. They also do not die when they should. This overgrowth of cancer cells becomes a mass of tissue called a tumor. Cancer cells grow out of control. They can grow through the airway and into the lung tissue. They can grow through the lung wall and invade other body parts. Cancer cells can break away from a tumor and spread. They can enter the bloodstream or a fluid called lymph and spread to other places. This out-of-control cell growth can harm the body. Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer.
95	PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment.
96	Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli.
97	This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins such as p16, or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next.
98	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
99	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
100	Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. In some cases, a sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins might be targeted with specific therapies. Smoking or heavy alcohol use will affect your treatment outcomes and increase treatment toxicity. It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer.
101	See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean, so keep reading for more details. 7 Adrenal glands 8 Adrenal tumors 8 Adrenocortical carcinoma 9 Signs and symptoms 9 Risk factors 10 Key points Adrenal tumors form in one or both adrenal glands. Adrenal glands produce hormones that affect your body in different ways. This chapter reviews the basics of adrenal tumors. Adrenal glands Your body has 2 adrenal glands. They are located on top of each kidney. Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Each adrenal gland has 2 main parts: Adrenal cortex – This is the outer part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape).
102	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
103	Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 7: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence Although the thyroid has been removed, cancer can return to the neck or to areas far from the neck. The return of cancer after treatment is called recurrence. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are targetable features of a cancer. Many are mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. For thyroid cancers with 1 or more specific biomarkers, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be a treatment option if needed. Biomarker testing involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. Testing for the following biomarkers is recommended for recurrent, advanced, or metastatic cancers that can't be treated with RAI therapy: h ALK gene fusion NTRK gene fusion BRAF gene mutations RET gene fusion (found in some medullary thyroid cancers) Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) Tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) Your provider may test for these individually or as part of a group. Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS).
104	Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. Non-hormonal birth control methods (barrier methods, IUDs) are preferred after a breast cancer diagnosis. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms and IUDs to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into your vein. Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood.
105	The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested. For p16- (HPV-) cancer stages, see Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Head and neck tumors are measured in centimeters (cm). A baseball is 7 cm, a golf ball is 4 cm, and a pea is 1 cm. Tis – Carcinoma in situ T1 – Tumor is 2 cm or smaller T2 – Tumor is between 2 and 4 cm T3 – Tumor is larger than 4 cm or has grown in to the epiglottis flap that closes the airway to the trachea) T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades the larynx, extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or mandible. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades lateral pterygoid muscle, pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases carotid artery. About ALL What is ALL? What are lymphocytes? What is blood? What's in this book? What can you do to get the best care? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell.
106	If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction?
107	It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected.
108	A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. Diagnostic CT Computed tomography, or CT, is like an x-ray but it shows body tissue more clearly. A diagnostic CT uses more radiation than regular CT and adds a contrast agent. Some people refer to this as a CAT scan. A contrast agent is a chemical that highlights body tissues for the scanner. It’s given to you through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some people can’t have contrast due to certain health issues, like allergies or chronic kidney disease. Ask if contrast is safe for you. A diagnostic CT of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis may be needed for 2 reasons: To look for big lymph nodes that may be causing symptoms To assess the extent of the cancer before starting treatment Since a CT scan is often not needed, you should ask your doctor what the reason is to obtain the test. A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel.
109	It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected.
110	HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). To find a donor match, your proteins will be compared to the donor’s proteins to see how many proteins are the same. A very good match is needed for a transplant to be a treatment option. Otherwise, your body will reject the donor cells or the donor cells will react against your body. Blood or tissue samples from you and your blood relatives will be tested first. Fertility (all genders) Treatment with targeted therapy and other forms of systemic therapy can affect your fertility, or the ability to have children. If possible, ask your care team before starting therapy how cancer and cancer treatment might affect your fertility. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
111	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
112	Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches.
113	It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease.
114	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
115	Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer. They include: An ultrasound (US) An alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test An ultrasound is a test that uses sound waves to take pictures of the inside of the body. A blood test checks for the protein AFP. An elevated or rising AFP might be a sign of primary liver cancer. This is cancer that starts in the liver. Follow-up steps after a screening ultrasound may include: If AFP is elevated or an ultrasound finds nodules that are 10 millimeters (mm) or larger, then you will have more tests. Nodules are small, round areas of tissue. Not all nodules are cancer. h If an ultrasound finds nodules that are smaller than , repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 3 to 6 months. If an ultrasound is negative, repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 6 months. Key points The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer.
116	The mouth, or oral cavity, is the first part of the digestive and respiratory (breathing) systems. The lips, cheeks, palate, teeth, and tongue make up the mouth. The mouth helps us breathe, talk, chew, taste, swallow, eat, and drink. The cheeks and lips hold food in the mouth and help to form and sound words. Parts of the mouth The 2 main functions of the mouth are eating and speaking. The mouth is also known as the oral cavity or the buccal cavity. Some important structures of the mouth: Hard palate is the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth. The mouth Tongue is a muscular organ in your mouth that aids in chewing, speaking, and breathing. Lips surround the opening of the mouth. Buccal (oral) mucosa is the lining inside the cheeks and inside where the lips touch the teeth. Alveolar ridge is the bony, raised area of the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) jaw that holds the sockets of the teeth. Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth.
117	Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli.
118	Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone. Menstrual periods may stop during treatment (called amenorrhea) and for up to 2 years after treatment, but often return in those 35 years of age and under. Endocrine therapy What is primary CNS lymphoma? What causes primary CNS lymphoma? How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Can primary CNS lymphoma be cured? What’s next? Key points Being diagnosed with a brain tumor can be frightening and overwhelming. This book will help you make sense of all the information that’s out there. It will also describe your options for treatment. Taken together, you’ll have the confidence to make wellinformed decisions. What is primary CNS lymphoma? Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that affects the central nervous system (CNS). Let’s break it down word by word to understand it better: Primary – Primary means first. When talking about cancer, primary refers to the place where cancer first started. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord.
119	You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! 2 Testing for AML Overview General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Bone marrow tests Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Overview Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. A diagnosis of AML is based on the presence of myeloid blasts in the bone marrow or blood. The number of blasts required to be diagnosed with AML can vary. In general, the number of blasts must be 20 percent or more of all cells found in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts.
120	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
121	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
122	A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia. However, these may not be the genetic changes you were born with. Therefore, a skin punch biopsy is used. In this procedure, a small piece of skin and connective tissue is removed to get DNA that hasn’t been altered by AML. This will be used to see if you inherited genes that increase your risk of leukemia. Leukemia predisposition syndrome can affect how your body responds to treatment. Blood and saliva can be used when AML cells disappear (in remission). Biological family members who are possible hematopoietic cell donors might be tested for leukemia predisposition syndrome. Testing of cells not affected by your leukemia (like skin) can help tell if you have a leukemia predisposition syndrome. AML mutation testing Mutation testing using methods such as karyotype (or cytogenetics), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), next-generation sequencing (NGS), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) look for changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells (genes and chromosomes).
123	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
124	Cancer that forms in squamous cells is known as squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the tissues that form the surface of the skin and in other areas of the body. Most colorectal cancers, in contrast, start in glandular cells and are called adenocarcinomas. This difference is important in determining treatment options. Anal squamous cell carcinoma is the focus of this patient guide. Other rare types not covered here include anal adenocarcinoma and anal melanoma. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® are available on rectal cancer and melanoma. The anus The anus is the opening through which feces (also called stool) exit the body. It is located at the very end of the large intestine (bowel). The colon is the first and longest section of the large bowel. The rectum is defined as the last several inches of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. The rectum and anus are located within the pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the body between the hip bones, below the abdomen. Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body.
125	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
126	Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy). Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III anal canal cancer. These stages are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Chemoradiation Chemoradiation is the recommended primary (main) treatment for non-metastatic anal canal cancer. Chemoradiation involves treatment with both chemotherapy and radiation therapy during the same time period. More information on this combined treatment approach is provided next. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy most often uses highenergy x-rays to kill cancer cells. An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer. It is a type of external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, radiation is delivered from outside (external to) the body using a large machine Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) called a linear accelerator. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor. All types of EBRT are conformal, which means that the radiation beams are shaped to the tumor.
127	What’s your stage? If you’ve reached this page, then you’ve probably been told the stage of your bladder cancer. Turn to the correct chapter to find out about your treatment. If your urologist or another provider told you your cancer stage, but you don’t remember or you didn’t understand, call the office and ask for more information. Someone there should be willing to explain it to you. Turn to the chapter that matches your cancer stage to read about the types of treatment you may receive. 7 The anus 8 Risk factors 9 Diagnosis and treatment planning 13 Staging 14 Fertility and family planning 15 Key points Anal cancer basics The anus Anal cancer is an uncommon cancer of the digestive system. Treatment should involve a team of digestive health experts with experience in chemotherapy, radiation, surgery, and imaging. Everyone with anal cancer is encouraged to consider enrolling in a clinical trial for treatment if available. Anal cancer most often starts in squamous cells lining the canal that leads from the skin surface into the rectum. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is known as squamous cell carcinoma.
128	This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA. Testing after diagnosis After a biopsy confirms anal squamous cell carcinoma, more testing is needed to plan treatment. Digital rectal exams are repeated. This section describes additional recommended testing after diagnosis. Lymph node exam There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes in the body. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Certain areas of the body contain more lymph nodes than others. The groin (where the thigh meets the abdomen) is one such area. Lymph nodes in the groin are called the inguinal lymph nodes. If left untreated, anal cancer cells can travel through lymphatics or blood to these groin lymph nodes or other lymph nodes in the pelvis, and then to other areas of the body. Lymph nodes cannot usually be seen or felt in the early stages of cancer, but may become enlarged as cancer progresses. Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation.
129	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
130	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
131	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
132	Cancer that forms in squamous cells is known as squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the tissues that form the surface of the skin and in other areas of the body. Most colorectal cancers, in contrast, start in glandular cells and are called adenocarcinomas. This difference is important in determining treatment options. Anal squamous cell carcinoma is the focus of this patient guide. Other rare types not covered here include anal adenocarcinoma and anal melanoma. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® are available on rectal cancer and melanoma. The anus The anus is the opening through which feces (also called stool) exit the body. It is located at the very end of the large intestine (bowel). The colon is the first and longest section of the large bowel. The rectum is defined as the last several inches of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. The rectum and anus are located within the pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the body between the hip bones, below the abdomen. Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body.
133	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
134	Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. the bladder, uterus, ovaries, vagina, and prostate gland. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. It is about 1 and a half inches (4 centimeters) long. The anal canal is surrounded by muscles (anal sphincters) that relax to allow stool to leave the body through the anus. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. In some cases, an anal tumor can involve both the anal canal and the perianal skin. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors develop anal cancer. And, some people with risk factors never get anal cancer. Risk factors for anal cancer are described next.
135	High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals. Other risk factors The health- and lifestyle-related factors listed below can also increase the risk of anal cancer. Some of these factors lead to a higher risk because they weaken the immune system. This can can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection. Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Taking anti-rejection medicines (immunosuppressants) after an organ transplant A history of cervical, vulvar, or vaginal cancer or precancer A history of anal precancer A history of blood cancer such as lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or multiple myeloma Certain autoimmune disorders, such as Crohn’s disease Smoking A history of anal sex A history of sexually transmitted infection (STI) Risk reduction Anal cancer starts as areas of abnormal cells, called lesions, in or near the anus. These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer.
136	High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals. Other risk factors The health- and lifestyle-related factors listed below can also increase the risk of anal cancer. Some of these factors lead to a higher risk because they weaken the immune system. This can can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection. Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Taking anti-rejection medicines (immunosuppressants) after an organ transplant A history of cervical, vulvar, or vaginal cancer or precancer A history of anal precancer A history of blood cancer such as lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or multiple myeloma Certain autoimmune disorders, such as Crohn’s disease Smoking A history of anal sex A history of sexually transmitted infection (STI) Risk reduction Anal cancer starts as areas of abnormal cells, called lesions, in or near the anus. These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer.
137	National Library of Medicine (NLM) Clinical Trials Database clinicaltrials.gov Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Words to know abdominoperineal resection (APR) A type of surgery that may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment. APR removes the anus, rectum, nearby cancerous lymph nodes, and other tissues. A permanent colostomy is needed. anal canal The small section of the large intestine that connects the rectum and the anal opening. anal sphincter A ring-shaped muscle around the opening of the anus that relaxes or tightens to open or close the anus. anus The opening at the end of the large bowel through which stool exits the body. chemoradiation The use of both chemotherapy and radiation therapy during the same time period (concurrently) to treat cancer. A commonly used initial treatment for anal cancer. clinical trial A research study using investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). colostomy A surgery that allows stool to leave the body after the anus is removed.
138	Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. the bladder, uterus, ovaries, vagina, and prostate gland. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. It is about 1 and a half inches (4 centimeters) long. The anal canal is surrounded by muscles (anal sphincters) that relax to allow stool to leave the body through the anus. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. In some cases, an anal tumor can involve both the anal canal and the perianal skin. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors develop anal cancer. And, some people with risk factors never get anal cancer. Risk factors for anal cancer are described next.
139	Cancer that forms in squamous cells is known as squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the tissues that form the surface of the skin and in other areas of the body. Most colorectal cancers, in contrast, start in glandular cells and are called adenocarcinomas. This difference is important in determining treatment options. Anal squamous cell carcinoma is the focus of this patient guide. Other rare types not covered here include anal adenocarcinoma and anal melanoma. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® are available on rectal cancer and melanoma. The anus The anus is the opening through which feces (also called stool) exit the body. It is located at the very end of the large intestine (bowel). The colon is the first and longest section of the large bowel. The rectum is defined as the last several inches of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. The rectum and anus are located within the pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the body between the hip bones, below the abdomen. Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body.
140	Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the pictures and sophisticated computer software, the radiation team will plan the best radiation dose and number of treatments. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. Your radiation oncologist will devise a treatment plan to aim radiation beams at the anal tumor and lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin. You will be alone in the treatment room. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room. The technician will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. As treatment is given, you may hear noises. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Common side effects at the treatment site during the 5 to 6 weeks of radiation treatment include skin irritation, tenderness, redness, and sores or skin breakdown. Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist.
141	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
142	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
143	The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia). If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the colon wall, towards the inside of the abdomen. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the colon. 自 Your care team will give you information on: How to prepare for surgery What to expect during and after surgery Recovery Possible short- and long-term side effects of colectomy, including: Leaking from the spot where the colon was reconnected (anastomotic leak) Changes in bowel habits Bowel blocked by scar tissue Organs pushing through tissues or muscles weakened by surgery (hernia) Cancer cells can also break off from the colon tumor and travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer.
144	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
145	It is sometimes called advanced disease. In stage 4, cancer has spread to other parts of the body (metastasized). How breast cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade and the status of the biomarkers such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR). Prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic.
146	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
147	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
148	Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow.
149	Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone.
150	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
151	3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer. This chapter describes the available treatment options and what you might expect from them. Talk with your care team about which treatment could be best for you. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with many treatment options. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy as well as non-hormone therapies like chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy. Often, hormone therapy is combined with one or more other therapies. Combining therapies can be more effective than using either therapy alone. key word in ADT is “deprivation”—this therapy “deprives” (starves) the cancer of its main fuel: androgens. This can shrink the tumor or slow tumor growth for a while. You might hear the term “castration” used when describing prostate cancer or its treatment. This term describes a drastic reduction of testosterone. Castration can be done with hormone-lowering medication or by surgical removal of one or both testicles (orchiectomy). Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles.
152	The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow. It can be tied to several factors: Older adults tend to develop changes or mutations that could cause cancer like CLL to form over time Blood relatives of someone with CLL can have a higher chance of getting CLL themselves Lymph system Many B cells are in the lymph (or lymphatic) system. This system plays a key role in fighting infections. The tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph vessels and nodes are parts of the lymph system (shown). There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body, and many are in the neck, armpits, and groin. How is CLL treated? Treatment of CLL depends on your body. You may not need treatment right away. But treatment may be needed if your white blood cell count is rising rapidly, if you have low numbers of other normal blood cells (anemia, low platelets, or low neutrophils), if you have large or uncomfortable lymph nodes, or if you have symptoms listed above. Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed.
153	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid.
154	Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, the care team might include the following: h A diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, ultrasounds, and other imaging tests. An interventional radiologist performs needle biopsies and places intravenous (IV) ports for treatment. A pathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. A surgical oncologist performs operations to remove cancer. h A reconstructive (plastic) surgeon performs breast reconstruction, if desired, for those who undergo mastectomy. A medical oncologist treats cancer in adults using systemic therapy. h A radiation oncologist prescribes and delivers radiation therapy to treat cancer. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you do not feel pain during surgery or procedures. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant.
155	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
156	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
157	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
158	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
159	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
160	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
161	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
162	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
163	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
164	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies.
165	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
166	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
167	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
168	Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. You may be given or advised to take a steroid and an antihistamine medication (like Benadryl) before the scan. It will lower the risk of an allergic reaction. MRI If surgery is needed or being considered, your doctor will order magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your pelvis. MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Special techniques called a staging protocol are used to stage the cancer. Contrast may or may not be used. MRI doesn't use radiation and is safe for most people. People with certain heart monitors, pacemakers, or some types of surgical clips generally can't have MRI. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver.
169	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
170	Chemotherapy Systemic therapy is drug therapy that works throughout the body. It is used before surgery to shrink the tumor or reduce the amount of cancer (called cancer burden). Preoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given before surgery. It is also called neoadjuvant therapy. Postoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given after surgery. It is also called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and some normal cells. More than one chemotherapy may be used to treat inflammatory breast cancer. When only one drug is used, it’s called a single agent. A combination or multi-agent regimen is the use of two or more chemotherapy drugs. Warnings about supplements and drug interactions You might be asked to stop taking or avoid certain herbal supplements when on a systemic therapy. Some supplements can affect the ability of a drug to do its job. This is called a drug interaction. It is critical to speak with your care team about any supplements you may be taking. Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job.
171	Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme. A high level of LDH can be a sign of cell damage caused by cancer or other health problems. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) blood test is needed for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized care and treatment with antiretroviral therapy in addition to cancer treatment. Hepatitis B testing will be necessary if you’re having immunotherapy treatment and you’ve had this virus before (or you’re at risk of getting it). Immunotherapy can “reawaken” the hepatitis B virus and cause illness that interferes with treatment. Bone marrow biopsy Most bones have a spongy center called marrow. The marrow is where new blood cells are made. It’s uncommon to find cancer cells in the bone marrow of people diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. But if imaging suggests the possibility of lymphoma in the bones, your care team may recommend a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed.
172	It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion.
173	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
174	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
175	Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found. Chapter 6: BPDCN discusses treatment of an aggressive subtype of AML. BPDCN can be found in blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and/or skin. Chapter 7: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of an AML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask.
176	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
177	APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer. This type of surgery is also used for some rectal cancers. In addition to the anus, APR typically involves removing the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and the fatty tissue surrounding the rectum. Lymph nodes in the groin will also be removed during surgery if any are known to have cancer. This is known as a groin dissection. Radiation treatment for anal cancer weakens and damages the perineum, which can interfere with healing after APR. In some cases, closing the wound requires taking tissue from another area of the body. This is known as muscle flap reconstruction. It can improve healing of the perineum and reduce complications after surgery. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominis, along with skin, fat, and blood vessels, is often used for reconstruction. If APR is planned, ask your doctor about muscle flap reconstruction. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment.
178	Yearly imaging for 3 years is also recommended for stage II and III anal cancers. APR surgery to remove the anus may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment. It involves creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. If cancer returns to lymph nodes in the groin (but not to the anal area) and you had radiation as part of initial treatment, a groin dissection and/or chemotherapy is recommended. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with chemotherapy. If the cancer does not respond or gets worse, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is recommended if you are eligible. Clinical trials provide access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the U.S. 3 Survivorship 32 Your primary care doctor 32 Late and long-term side effects 36 Healthy habits 37 More information 3 Survivorship Survivorship focuses on the physical, emotional, and financial issues unique to cancer survivors. Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship.
179	Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist. Over-the-counter ointments like Aquaphor or Silvadene can soothe the skin and help with healing. Other short-term side effects of radiation therapy include diarrhea, fatigue, frequent urination or pain while urinating, and nausea. Most of these decrease over time when treatment is over. Radiation therapy side effects may not be felt immediately. They can appear and worsen later in the cycle or even after it is complete. Radiation therapy for anal cancer can also have long-term and potentially serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. See “Fertility and family planning” on page 14 and Part 3: Survivorship for information on ways to help prevent, limit, or manage these effects. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of anti-cancer medicines. It is a type of systemic therapy. Most commonly, chemotherapy is given intravenously. This means the medicine(s) are slowly infused into the body through a vein. The medicine(s) travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can also be given orally. Radiation therapy An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer.
180	Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer. The images can reveal a lymphoma’s location, size, and other features. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging technique for identifying primary CNS lymphoma. An MRI scan is good at showing the spine and soft tissues, including the brain, as well as other details that are helpful for planning surgery. MRI uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. During an MRI, you’ll lie on a table that slides into the scanning machine. (An open MRI scanner may be an option at some health care centers.) It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best pictures. The machine makes loud noises but you can wear earplugs. An MRI of the brain or spinal cord usually requires a contrast agent (also called contrast dye or just contrast). Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see.
181	Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink.
182	It’s important to know the specific type of cancer, or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Breast cancer basics The breast Ductal carcinoma in situ Key points Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found in the cells that line the ducts in the breast. DCIS is stage 0 or noninvasive cancer. This means the cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread outside the ducts. DCIS is treated to prevent invasive breast cancer, a more advanced form of cancer. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple.
183	Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Be prepared to have many blood tests during AML treatment and recovery to check treatment results, blood counts, and the health of organs like your liver and kidneys. Some possible tests are described next. The list starts with more common tests. Complete blood count and differential A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. A CBC is a key test that gives a picture of your overall health. AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells.
184	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
185	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
186	Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid. Lymph nodes While lymph travels throughout your body in lymphatic vessels, it passes through hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Lymph nodes can’t usually be seen or felt. The highest numbers of lymph nodes are found in the neck, groin, and armpits. Spleen The spleen is the largest organ of the lymphatic system. It is about 4 inches long and shaped like a fist. It makes lymphocytes and plays an important role in blood filtration and storage. Lymphatic system There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures, called lymph nodes, throughout the human body. They catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Bone marrow Most bones have soft, spongy tissue in the center called bone marrow. This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest.
187	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
188	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
189	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
190	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
191	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
192	A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health problems such as arthritis. The scan takes about 30 minutes. You will be asked to hold still during the scan. At one point the scanner will be less than one inch from your face. Talk to your care team about what to expect. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies.
193	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
194	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
195	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
196	Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. There are also genetic abnormalities that don’t run in families and aren’t inherited. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared to white males. Hispanic and Asian males are less likely than both white and Black males to be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Several things contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), as well as biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean?
197	HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized therapy in addition to cancer treatment. So everyone with primary CNS lymphoma needs to have an HIV blood test. List all your drugs and supplements Your treatment team will ask you to write a list of all the prescription drugs you take and how often you take them. Make copies of this list, which you can give to the many other providers or specialists you may see. Also be sure to tell your treatment team if you’re using any over-the-counter medicines (including antacids, aspirin, or NSAIDs like ibuprofen) or supplements, vitamins, or herbs. Some of these can interfere with your cancer treatment. For example, some supplements or herbs can raise or lower the levels of chemotherapy drugs in your body. This may cause more side effects or make your treatment less effective. 3 Treatment options Clinical trial Steroids Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Stem cell rescue Supportive care What’s next? Key points This chapter lists the different treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma. Ask your care team about the risks and benefits of each option. Together, you and your team can make a treatment plan.
198	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
199	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
200	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
201	Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place. Surgery to remove one ovary and its fallopian tube is called a unilateral salpingooophorectomy (USO). USO is only an option if the cancer is in 1 ovary and the cancer is appropriate for this procedure. After a USO, you may still be able to become pregnant naturally if you haven’t entered menopause. If the cancer is in both ovaries, a BSO (without hysterectomy) may be an option. While you can't become pregnant naturally after a BSO, pregnancy may be possible using assisted reproductive approaches. One such approach is in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, eggs are fertilized with sperm in a lab to create embryos. The embryos are implanted into the uterus or frozen for future use. The eggs used for IVF may be yours (removed from your ovary before surgery) or donor eggs. Donor eggs are removed from women who have volunteered to go through hormone treatment to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen.
202	Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells.
203	In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. The sample is sent to a lab to be tested for cancer cells. Your tumor type If molecular testing was performed on your biopsy sample, the pathology report should reveal your tumor type. It’s important to identify the exact type of tumor you have to predict the course of your disease and plan your treatment. There are 3 ways to classify a glioma: Histology – The first way to classify the tumor is by looking at it under a microscope. This is called histology. For instance, a glioma with cells that look like astrocytes is likely to be an astrocytoma. Grade – Another way to classify a tumor is by grade, which is a rating of how abnormal its cells are. The more abnormal its cells, the faster and farther the tumor is likely to grow. Biomarkers – A glioma is also identified by its biomarkers. A biomarker is a molecular characteristic such as a genetic mutation. Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene.
204	Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells.
205	A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and help you interpret the results of these tests. Germline testing is recommended for those with prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others High-risk, very-high-risk, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Having any other type of cancer Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Molecular biomarker testing In biomarker testing, a sample from your biopsy is tested to look at its molecular components. This information helps figure out how likely your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. Biomarker testing can be considered for those with localized, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer. Biomarker testing is sometimes called genomic testing, tumor profiling, or molecular tumor testing. The main reason to have a molecular biomarker test is to help assess whether you have lower risk or higher risk prostate cancer.
206	A colectomy can be done in two ways. The open method removes tumor tissue through a Colectomy Surgery for colon cancer is called colectomy. It involves removing the cancerous part of the colon. The two healthy ends of the remaining colon are then attached to each other. large cut in your abdomen. The minimally invasive method involves making a few small cuts. Tools are inserted through the cuts to see and remove part of your colon. The tissue removed during surgery is sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines how far the cancer has grown within the colon wall. They also test the removed lymph nodes for cancer. These results are used to assign the cancer a stage. The stage helps determine whether you need chemotherapy after surgery. At the time of colectomy, some people may also have a procedure called a colostomy. This is done in cases where it may not be safe to reconnect the remaining sections of colon. In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma.
207	Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ). The germ triggers the immune system, causing the immune system to attack cancer cells inside the bladder. Intravesical BCG can lower the chance of recurrence (cancer coming back) or getting worse (invading bladder muscle). Intravesical BCG is commonly used for highgrade bladder cancer that hasn’t invaded the muscle layer. It’s usually started about 3 to 6 weeks after TURBT, to allow the bladder time to heal. It’s given once a week for 6 weeks. You should have a full re-evaluation at 12 weeks after starting treatment. To prevent recurrence, you might be asked to continue having intravesical BCG therapy. This is called maintenance therapy. Maintenance therapy involves three intravesical BCG treatments (given in one week) at 3 months and again at 6 months after TURBT. You may continue to have maintenance therapy every 6 months for up to 3 years, depending on the risk of recurrence. Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder.
208	Primary CNS lymphoma is frequently linked to HIV, the immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Carrying the Epstein-Barr virus, which is the virus that causes mononucleosis (“mono”) and other illnesses. Epstein-Barr is one of the most common viruses in humans. Most people are infected with it. After you’re infected, the virus remains dormant (inactive or “sleeping”) in your body for life. Having an autoimmune disease, such as lupus, in which the immune system overreacts and attacks healthy tissues and organs. Having an organ transplant, which requires medications that suppress the immune system. This leads to a higher risk of infections. Being an older adult. Although primary CNS lymphoma can occur at any age, the majority of people diagnosed with it are in their 60s or 70s. How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Primary CNS lymphoma is often found when a person develops symptoms. A symptom is a feeling or problem that may be a sign of disease. Symptoms usually develop over several weeks. Primary CNS lymphoma can cause a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain.
209	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
210	The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus. Other risk factors for anal cancer include HIV infection, immunosuppressant use, a history of certain cancers or pre-cancers, certain autoimmune disorders, smoking, and a history of anal sex or sexually transmitted infection. h Recommended testing after diagnosis includes DRE, anoscopy, HIV testing, an screening for cervical cancer. The cancer stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body. Stages I, II, and III are non-metastatic. Stage IV is metastatic. 2 Treatment guide 17 Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) 20 Perianal cancer (stages I – III) 22 Follow-up and surveillance 24 Recurrence 26 Metastatic anal cancer 28 Clinical trials 30 Key points 2 Treatment guide Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. Surgery to remove the anus may be needed for cancer that does not respond to treatment or that returns after treatment. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
211	Side effects depend on many factors, especially the type of treatment (radiation versus chemotherapy, for example) and the length or the dose of treatment. Here are some common side effects of different treatments: Bladder removal surgery – bleeding, blood clots, kidney problems, infection, sexual dysfunction, incontinence, problems caused by the urinary diversion Intravesical therapy – swelling (inflammation) of the bladder lining, frequent urination, pain or burning feeling when urinating, blood in the urine, infection Chemotherapy – nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), fever, infection, tingling or numbness, rash, diarrhea Immunotherapy – autoimmune reaction, fatigue, fever, nausea, loss of appetite, infection, diarrhea, constipation Not every patient develops nausea or vomiting from cancer therapy. But if you have these side effects, it’s important to reduce them as much as possible to prevent them from interfering with your treatment. Read more about these side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery.
212	These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple to carry breast milk. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex is a term that refers to both parts. Lymph is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs or tumor cells. Lymph drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts.
213	A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy. In a modified radical mastectomy, the breast and underarm (axilla) sentinel lymph nodes are removed. Before removing the breast, the surgeon may do a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). Sentinel lymph nodes are the first lymph nodes cancer cells are likely to have spread from the primary tumor. Breast reconstruction is an option after a mastectomy. If you opt for reconstruction, it will be done after finishing cancer treatment. This is called delayed reconstruction. Breast reconstruction is often done in stages. You might want to consult with a plastic surgeon. When preparing for surgery, seek the opinion of an experienced surgeon. The surgeon should be an expert in performing your type of surgery. Hospitals that perform many surgeries often have better results. You can ask for a referral to a hospital or cancer center that has experience in treating your type of cancer. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors.
214	Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer. N0 means no cancer is in the regional lymph nodes. Isolated tumor cells (ITCs) may be present. These are malignant cell clusters no larger than . N1mi means micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than , but not larger than ) are found in lymph nodes. N1, N2, N3 means regional lymph node metastases are found. The higher the number, the more lymph nodes that have metastases. M Metastasis Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is shown as MThis is metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The most common sites for metastasis are bone and lung. M0 means no evidence of distant metastasis. M1 means distant metastasis is found. This is metastatic breast cancer. Clinical staging Clinical staging of lymph nodes is staging before surgery. Cancer is in axillary nodes Cancer is in internal mammary nodes Cancer is in infraclavicular nodes Cancer is in supraclavicular nodes Grade Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers.
215	You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies. You may need to rest and place an ice pack on the biopsy area after the procedure. If you are working or have other commitments, you may want to take the day off to recover emotionally and physically from the experience. Axillary lymph node needle biopsy An axillary lymph node (ALN) drains lymph fluid from the breast and nearby areas. In an axillary lymph node biopsy, a sample of lymph node near the armpit (axilla) is biopsied with a needle. This is to determine if abnormal lymph nodes seen on imaging tests contain cancer cells. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) or core biopsy will be used. If cancer is found, it is called node positive (node+). A marker may be placed in the node so that it can be identified later if needed. Standard of care is the best known way to treat particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care.
216	You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies. You may need to rest and place an ice pack on the biopsy area after the procedure. If you are working or have other commitments, you may want to take the day off to recover emotionally and physically from the experience. Axillary lymph node needle biopsy An axillary lymph node (ALN) drains lymph fluid from the breast and nearby areas. In an axillary lymph node biopsy, a sample of lymph node near the armpit (axilla) is biopsied with a needle. This is to determine if abnormal lymph nodes seen on imaging tests contain cancer cells. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) or core biopsy will be used. If cancer is found, it is called node positive (node+). A marker may be placed in the node so that it can be identified later if needed. Standard of care is the best known way to treat particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care.
217	Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as local/regional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on metastatic breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk.
218	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
219	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
220	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies.
221	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
222	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
223	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
224	It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers.
225	In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your child's care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems due to pressure on the windpipe and blood vessels. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow.
226	In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your child's care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems due to pressure on the windpipe and blood vessels. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow.
227	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
228	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
229	A one-way valve, made from part of the intestine, prevents the urine from flowing out of the stoma. The stoma can be covered by a small bandage. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it much less noticeable. A catheter must be inserted into the stoma, through the valve, and into the pouch several times a day to drain the urine. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that no ostomy bag is needed. This may appeal to people with concerns about body image or people who don’t want to worry about the bag coming loose or leaking. Intravesical therapy While surgery is done to remove visible cancer, intravesical therapy is used to destroy cancer cells that aren’t visible or are hard to reach. Intravesical therapy means putting medicine directly into the bladder. It’s done with a flexible tube, called a catheter, inserted into the urethra. The medicine flows through the catheter and into the bladder using a process called instillation. The two main intravesical therapies used to treat bladder cancer are bacillus CalmetteGuérin (BCG) and chemotherapy. Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ).
230	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
231	Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health. These include a neurological exam and an evaluation of your level of activity. After these, you’ll have imaging scans and one or more biopsies. Neurological exam This exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, balance, coordination, reflexes, hearing, and other senses. Your doctor may also perform an eye exam to look at the health of the nerves in the back of your eye. Performance status Your care team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status. The more activities you can do, the better your performance status. Your care team uses this evaluation to get a sense of the level of treatment you may be able to handle and whether you may be eligible for a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer.
232	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
233	This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body. Skin lesions Basal cell skin cancer is often found on the face, head, and neck. Here is a basal cell lesion pictured on a person's cheek. Skin basics Did you know that your skin is your body’s largest organ and if you measured it it would stretch to about 20 square feet? Working as a barrier, your skin protects you from bacteria and chemicals and helps control your body temperature. It has 3 layers: Epidermis – The top layer of skin provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis – The middle layer involves connective tissue, blood vessels, oil and sweat glands, nerves, and hair follicles. Hypodermis – The deepest tissue layer is made up of fat and connective tissue. Most skin cancers form in the cells of the epidermis. It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis.
234	A one-way valve, made from part of the intestine, prevents the urine from flowing out of the stoma. The stoma can be covered by a small bandage. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it much less noticeable. A catheter must be inserted into the stoma, through the valve, and into the pouch several times a day to drain the urine. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that no ostomy bag is needed. This may appeal to people with concerns about body image or people who don’t want to worry about the bag coming loose or leaking. Intravesical therapy While surgery is done to remove visible cancer, intravesical therapy is used to destroy cancer cells that aren’t visible or are hard to reach. Intravesical therapy means putting medicine directly into the bladder. It’s done with a flexible tube, called a catheter, inserted into the urethra. The medicine flows through the catheter and into the bladder using a process called instillation. The two main intravesical therapies used to treat bladder cancer are bacillus CalmetteGuérin (BCG) and chemotherapy. Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ).
235	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
236	Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well. Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) starts in the mucus-making cells of the inner lining of the esophagus. Adenocarcinomas are often found in the lower esophagus but can occur in the middle esophagus as well. Today, most esophageal cancers in North America and Western Europe are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell carcinoma is more common in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Treatment is based on the type and location of esophageal cancer, in addition to the stage of the tumor (where it is in the body). Some tumors that start in the stomach and cross over into the area between the esophagus and stomach (esophagogastric junction) are treated as esophageal cancers and not as stomach cancers. However, this depends on the exact location of the tumor. Siewert types used as part of cancer staging describe where the tumor is relative to the esophagus and stomach. Barrett esophagus In Barrett esophagus (BE), the squamous cells that line the lower part of the esophagus have changed or been replaced with abnormal cells as a result of chronic reflux.
237	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
238	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
239	The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for basal cell skin cancer 10 General health tests 12 Biopsy 13 Imaging 13 What’s next 14 Key points 14 Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and then treat basal cell skin cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Whether you or your doctor found a concerning lesion on your skin, testing is needed to identify and diagnose basal cell skin cancer. The diagnosis is based on the results in your medical and family history, a physical exam, skin exam, and biopsy, and, in some cases, imaging studies. See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan.
240	Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold. Skin has 3 layers: Epidermis is the outermost (top) layer of skin that provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis contains connective tissue, hair follicles, and sweat glands. Hypodermis (subcutis) is the deepest layer, made up of fat and connective tissue. Skin cancers are often formed in the epidermis. There are 3 main types of cells in the epidermis: Squamous cells: These cells are thin, flat cells that look like fish scales, and are found in the tissue that forms the surface of the skin. Basal cells: These cells are found in the lower part of the epidermis, called the basal cell layer. Basal cells constantly divide to form new cells to replace the squamous cells that wear off of the skin’s surface. As these cells move up in the epidermis, they get flatter, eventually becoming squamous cells. Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes.
241	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
242	Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck. Moderately or very advanced disease – Cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the base of the skull, larynx, pharynx, bones and muscles behind the nasal cavity, jaw, and roof of the mouth. It might include cancer in the carotid artery. Metastatic – Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. p16- (HPV-) cancer stages p16- throat cancer starts in the oropharynx and is not caused by human papillomavirus (HPV). The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested.
243	The mouth, or oral cavity, is the first part of the digestive and respiratory (breathing) systems. The lips, cheeks, palate, teeth, and tongue make up the mouth. The mouth helps us breathe, talk, chew, taste, swallow, eat, and drink. The cheeks and lips hold food in the mouth and help to form and sound words. Parts of the mouth The 2 main functions of the mouth are eating and speaking. The mouth is also known as the oral cavity or the buccal cavity. Some important structures of the mouth: Hard palate is the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth. The mouth Tongue is a muscular organ in your mouth that aids in chewing, speaking, and breathing. Lips surround the opening of the mouth. Buccal (oral) mucosa is the lining inside the cheeks and inside where the lips touch the teeth. Alveolar ridge is the bony, raised area of the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) jaw that holds the sockets of the teeth. Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth.
244	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
245	What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction? Biomarker-based treatment If the cancer has any of the biomarkers listed in Guide 3 below, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be an option. For information on the side effects of immunotherapy, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer basics The throat The pharynx Head and neck cancers Throat cancer Key points The throat is located in the back of the mouth and in the neck. Cancer can form in part of the throat called the oropharynx. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and the base of the tongue. The throat The throat is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and esophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach).
246	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
247	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
248	It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing. Intravesical chemotherapy may also be an option if BCG is unavailable, or if you were given BCG therapy but it wasn’t effective. In these cases, it’s given on the same schedule as BCG therapy: once a week for 6 weeks, usually beginning 3 to 4 weeks after TURBT. Maintenance intravesical chemotherapy, if given, is usually on a monthly basis for 1 to 2 years. Because intravesical chemotherapy only goes into the bladder, not the entire body, it doesn’t usually cause the harsh side effects that chemotherapy is known for. However, it may cause the same type of side effects as intravesical BCG therapy. BCG shortage Even though BCG has been used for decades to treat bladder cancer, it’s been in short supply in the United States and worldwide for several years. As a result, many people with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer haven’t been able to receive this treatment or have received a reduced dose. Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it.
249	Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it. If a regular course of BCG treatment isn’t available to you, your treatment team may offer intravesical treatment with chemotherapy instead. Other options include: Reduced doses or a shorter course of BCG treatment Eliminating BCG maintenance therapy Bladder removal surgery (for those at high risk of the cancer returning after treatment) Joining a clinical trial Systemic therapy Systemic therapy means a treatment that affects the whole body. It’s generally given directly into a vein (intravenously, or IV). The most common types of systemic therapy for bladder cancer are chemotherapy and immunotherapy. To determine which type of systemic therapy is best for you, your treatment team will consider your overall health. This includes how your heart, liver, and kidneys are functioning, how far the cancer has progressed, and your ability to do day-to-day activities. Note that systemic chemotherapy is different than intravesical chemotherapy. Systemic chemotherapy is a whole-body therapy. Intravesical chemotherapy only affects the inside of the bladder. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion).
250	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
251	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
252	If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells. It is not passed down from birth parents to children. The BCR::ABL1 gene makes a new protein that leads to uncontrolled blood cell growth. This growth ultimately leads to CML. Treatment for CML aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL1 protein. Those with CML should be treated at centers experienced in this type of cancer. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of a CML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common.
253	However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells. It is not passed down from birth parents to children. The BCR::ABL1 gene makes a new protein that leads to uncontrolled blood cell growth. This growth ultimately leads to CML. Treatment for CML aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL1 protein. Those with CML should be treated at centers experienced in this type of cancer. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
254	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
255	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
256	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
257	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
258	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
259	The mouth, or oral cavity, is the first part of the digestive and respiratory (breathing) systems. The lips, cheeks, palate, teeth, and tongue make up the mouth. The mouth helps us breathe, talk, chew, taste, swallow, eat, and drink. The cheeks and lips hold food in the mouth and help to form and sound words. Parts of the mouth The 2 main functions of the mouth are eating and speaking. The mouth is also known as the oral cavity or the buccal cavity. Some important structures of the mouth: Hard palate is the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth. The mouth Tongue is a muscular organ in your mouth that aids in chewing, speaking, and breathing. Lips surround the opening of the mouth. Buccal (oral) mucosa is the lining inside the cheeks and inside where the lips touch the teeth. Alveolar ridge is the bony, raised area of the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) jaw that holds the sockets of the teeth. Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth.
260	A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed.
261	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
262	Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. You may be given or advised to take a steroid and an antihistamine medication (like Benadryl) before the scan. It will lower the risk of an allergic reaction. MRI If surgery is needed or being considered, your doctor will order magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your pelvis. MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Special techniques called a staging protocol are used to stage the cancer. Contrast may or may not be used. MRI doesn't use radiation and is safe for most people. People with certain heart monitors, pacemakers, or some types of surgical clips generally can't have MRI. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver.
263	Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. Sometimes, the sample is taken straight to the neuropathologist while you’re still in the operating room. The neuropathologist will perform an analysis right away and send the results back to the neurosurgeon. The results will say whether the tumor is malignant (cancerous) or benign (not cancerous). The results may also include the preliminary diagnosis, including the type and grade of the glioma. Knowing the preliminary diagnosis during your surgery helps the neurosurgeon to decide how much of the tumor to remove. The neuropathologist will also do molecular (genetic) testing, which indicates the type and growth rate of your glioma and other specific features. All this information will help your treatment team figure out the best treatment plan for you. If your hospital or medical center doesn’t have a neuropathologist, you can ask to have your biopsy sent to one. Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose a glioma tumor. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor.
264	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
265	Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know. Some people with CLL have certain biomarkers that can be targets for chemoimmunotherapy. More research is needed to know how they predict the results of targeted therapy. See Guide Beta-2 microglobulin is also a biomarker used to determine how hard cancer will be to treat. High levels may suggest that CLL will likely be harder to treat. What’s next? What happens next depends on what your tests find. You may move on to a stage called “watch and wait”. This means you won’t start any treatment aside from those that make you feel better if you’re sick. We’ll talk about this it more in Chapter 3: Watch and wait. You could move on to treatment right away if your care team feels you need to. We’ll tell you all about what treatments you could use in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. There’s a condition called Richter transformation that we describe in Chapter 5: Richter transformation. If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter.
266	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
267	If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction?
268	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
269	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
270	Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place.
271	The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum). The liver and nearby organs The gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, and small intestine are found near the liver. Bile Liver cells make bile. Bile is a yellow or green fluid made up of cholesterol, bilirubin, salts such as potassium and sodium, water, and other elements found in the body. It flows into small channels that drain into thin tubes called ducts. These ducts form larger and larger channels that flow into the left and right hepatic ducts. The left and right hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct joins with the cystic duct that connects to the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The common bile duct is joined by the pancreatic duct just before it enters the small intestine. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ found under the liver. It is sometimes described as sac-like because it holds bile from the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food.
272	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
273	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
274	Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it.
275	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
276	At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) cisplatin paclitaxel Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) carboplatin + paclitaxel The preferred first-line regimen for all other metastatic cervical cancers is: h Cisplatin paclitaxel bevacizumab Pembrolizumab is an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). Bevacizumab is a type of targeted therapy called a biologic that is designed to work with chemotherapy. Other recommended first-line regimens include different combinations of cisplatin (or carboplatin), topotecan, paclitaxel, and/or bevacizumab. Second-line or beyond If you cannot have more platinum-based chemotherapy, there are other options. Treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is preferred for cancers with one of the following biomarkers: TMB-H PD-L1–positive MSI-H/dMMR For cancers with a biomarker other than those listed above, immunotherapy or targeted therapy may be an option. Biomarkers and their related systemic therapies are listed in Guide For cancers without any of the biomarkers in Guide 1, preferred options include: Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak), and Cemiplimab (Libtayo). If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app.
277	It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone. This is called metastatic liver cancer. Inside the liver are blood and lymphatic vessels. Cancer can spread from the liver through the blood and lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is made up of a network of vessels that carry a clear fluid called lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food, and it has white blood cells that fight germs. Lymph nodes filter lymph and remove the germs. Although possible, HCC does not commonly spread to nearby lymph nodes. Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing liver cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing liver cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, heart, liver, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs).
278	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
279	Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. This is called egg freezing or oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mismatch repair testing All colon cancers should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Testing for this biomarker involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Cancers that do not have these biomarkers are called microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history.
280	It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer Mouth or oral cancer can develop in the lips (mucosal lip), the lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa), the front two-thirds of the tongue, the upper and lower gums (gingiva), the floor of the mouth under the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate), and the small area behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone). 2 Testing for mouth cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your cancer stage treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider.
281	A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy. In general, to be diagnosed with AML, 20 percent or more myeloblasts must be present in the bone marrow or blood. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 cells are blasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Genetic and biomarker tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely course the cancer will take called a prognosis. Questions to ask What subtype of AML do I have? What does this mean in terms of prognosis and treatment options? Is there a cancer center or hospital nearby that specializes in my subtype of AML? What tests will I have? How often will they be repeated? h Will my insurance pay for these tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps?
282	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
283	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
284	Share this information with your care team and update your team with any changes to your family history. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems). You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has full and upto-date information about how you’re doing. Diagnostic tests Diagnostic tests are used to confirm you have cancer. They’re also used to find out if the cancer is localized or advanced. Diagnostic tests can help plan treatment after you’ve been diagnosed and can detect whether the cancer is still growing or spreading after treatment. Diagnostic tests include imaging scans, biopsies, and genetic tests. Imaging tests An imaging test takes pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal cancer, including its size, location, and other features such as the size of the prostate itself.
285	The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for basal cell skin cancer 10 General health tests 12 Biopsy 13 Imaging 13 What’s next 14 Key points 14 Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and then treat basal cell skin cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Whether you or your doctor found a concerning lesion on your skin, testing is needed to identify and diagnose basal cell skin cancer. The diagnosis is based on the results in your medical and family history, a physical exam, skin exam, and biopsy, and, in some cases, imaging studies. See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan.
286	Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin. Excision biopsy During an excision biopsy, all or part of the lesion is removed. This biopsy can be done in Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, and genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used.
287	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
288	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
289	Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs.
290	These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects. The main chemotherapy drug used to treat primary CNS lymphoma is high-dose methotrexate. Methotrexate is one of the most effective drugs for treating many kinds of cancers. But when given in high doses, methotrexate may cause damage to the kidneys, liver, and other organs. In severe cases, kidney failure is possible. To reduce this risk, you’ll have to stay at the hospital during methotrexate treatment and receive fluids through a vein in your arm. You may also be given medicine to reduce the toxicity of methotrexate and to prevent severe problems in your kidneys and other organs. Many cancer treatments, including chemotherapy, can lead to birth defects. So avoid becoming pregnant or getting someone pregnant while on chemotherapy treatment. Other side effects of chemotherapy include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mouth sores, loss of appetite, hair loss, low blood cell counts, What about side effects? A side effect is an unhealthy or unpleasant physical or emotional condition caused by treatment. Every treatment for primary CNS lymphoma can cause side effects.
291	Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above. Your chances of getting prostate cancer increase as you become older. Family history Your family health history is information about the diseases and health conditions in your family. A family history reflects a pattern of certain diseases among family members. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at a higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer or other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. But genetic abnormalities that aren’t inherited can occur, too. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed.
292	What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk.
293	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
294	This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys. Because it is the most common type, RCC is often simply referred to as kidney cancer. RCC is the focus of this book. There are other, less common cancers that can arise in the kidney. While they can sometimes be confused with RCC, it is important to note that they are treated differently. Urothelial carcinoma starts in the cells that line the renal pelvis and ureter that drain the kidney. While these tumors can be found up the ureter near the kidneys, they are not kidney tumors. These tumors share many features with bladder cancer. These tumors used to be called transitional call cancer. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Bladder Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) usually occurs in young children. In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney.
295	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
296	Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery. While you may not get these side effects, you should be aware of them as you consider the benefits and risks of different treatments: h Sexual dysfunction – Treatment or cancer itself may interfere with your ability to have sex. Sexual dysfunction also includes a decreased desire to have sex. This may be due to a lack of energy, being self-conscious about your body after surgery, or feeling stressed out and depressed. Trouble controlling the flow of urine – Urine may come out when you’re not expecting it. This is referred to as urinary incontinence. But there are things you can do, like pelvic floor exercises, that can help you regain control of urine function. Many side effects can be managed. Some can even be prevented. Ask your treatment team for a complete list of short- and long-term side effects and information on how to manage them. Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences.
297	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
298	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
299	Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall. Stage 0is stands for carcinoma in situ (CIS). This is a flat patch of cancer cells that hasn’t grown any farther than where it started. It’s still on the surface of the bladder lining and has yet to invade deeper layers. However, carcinoma in situ is fast-growing, aggressive, and can be very serious. Stage 1 Stage 1 has grown through the inner lining of the bladder wall and into the layer of connective tissue. But stage 1 hasn’t invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall (non– muscle-invasive). Stage 2 Stage 2 bladder cancer has grown into the muscle layer (muscle-invasive), but it hasn’t reached the fatty layer covering the outside of the bladder nor has it spread anywhere else. Stage 3 Stage 3 has grown through the bladder wall and into the fatty layer surrounding the bladder. It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis).
300	If the cancer has spread outside the bladder (metastasized), staging describes where it has spread to and whether it’s affecting other parts of the body. Staging uses your test results to identify and locate your cancer. Staging helps you and your care team select the best therapy. There are five stages of bladder cancer: 0, 1, 2, 3, and Some stages are also divided into subgroups. You may see the cancer stage written with a T, where the T stands for tumor: T0, T1, T2, T3, and T An important thing about bladder cancer is whether the tumor has or hasn’t grown into the bladder muscle. Cancer in stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t grown into the muscle layer (non– muscle-invasive). Cancer in stages 2, 3, and 4 have grown into the muscle layer (muscleinvasive). Cancer that has invaded the muscle layer needs more intense treatment. Stage 0 Stage 0 is the earliest stage of bladder cancer. This stage of cancer affects only the inner lining of the bladder (urothelial layer). Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall.
301	Side effects depend on many factors, especially the type of treatment (radiation versus chemotherapy, for example) and the length or the dose of treatment. Here are some common side effects of different treatments: Bladder removal surgery – bleeding, blood clots, kidney problems, infection, sexual dysfunction, incontinence, problems caused by the urinary diversion Intravesical therapy – swelling (inflammation) of the bladder lining, frequent urination, pain or burning feeling when urinating, blood in the urine, infection Chemotherapy – nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), fever, infection, tingling or numbness, rash, diarrhea Immunotherapy – autoimmune reaction, fatigue, fever, nausea, loss of appetite, infection, diarrhea, constipation Not every patient develops nausea or vomiting from cancer therapy. But if you have these side effects, it’s important to reduce them as much as possible to prevent them from interfering with your treatment. Read more about these side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery.
302	That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned. The most common kind of bladder cancer starts in the urothelial cells, which are stretchy cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells also form the inner layer in the rest of the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys, the ureters, and the urethra. Cancer of the urothelium can start in these areas instead of the bladder, although it’s less common. Other (non-urothelial) types of bladder cancer are much less common. These include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. How is bladder cancer found? Bladder cancer is usually found when a person has symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may signal a disease or condition. The most common symptom of bladder cancer, and the one that usually appears first, is having blood in your urine (hematuria). How does blood get into urine? Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red.
303	Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco 3 Staging and grading 23 24 26 26 27 How far and how fast? Stage Grade Subtypes Key points The stage and grade of your cancer represent how far and how fast your cancer has grown. Your care team needs to know the stage and the grade of your cancer to predict the course of your disease and to make a treatment plan. Stage measures the physical extent of the cancer. It’s a number rating of how far the cancer has grown into the bladder wall. Numbers range from 0 to 4, where 0 means no growth into the bladder and 4 means it has grown through the bladder wall and out to other parts of the body. Grade measures the overall aggressiveness of the cancer. It’s an estimate of the rate that the cancer is growing.
304	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
305	However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells. It is not passed down from birth parents to children. The BCR::ABL1 gene makes a new protein that leads to uncontrolled blood cell growth. This growth ultimately leads to CML. Treatment for CML aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL1 protein. Those with CML should be treated at centers experienced in this type of cancer. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
306	About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
307	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
308	Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the organ that creates blood in our body. It is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. Stem cells multiply to maintain a supply throughout our lifetime. Some of these stem cells gradually develop into blood cells through a process called differentiation. At any given time, the bone marrow contains cells at various stages of development, from very immature to nearly mature. Once a blood stem cell fully develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into the bloodstream as needed. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells.
309	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
310	After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors.
311	Capecitabine can cause a side effect known as hand-foot syndrome. Symptoms include redness, swelling, and pain on the palms of the hands, bottoms of feet, or both. Sometimes blisters appear. Your dose of capecitabine may be changed at the earliest signs of hand-foot syndrome. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 23 for next steps. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better: NCCN.org/patients/feedback Perianal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III perianal cancer. Stages I through III are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Like anal canal cancer, most perianal cancers are treated with chemoradiation. However, local excision (surgery) may be an option for some early-stage, low-risk perianal cancers. Local excision involves removing only the tumor and a small area of surrounding tissue. Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers.
312	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
313	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. Confirmed CSCC Once a diagnosis of CSCC is made, your doctor will follow up with: A complete head-to-toe skin exam to look for other lesions An exam of the lymph nodes Cancer cells can travel through blood and a fluid called lymph to form tumors in other parts of the body. Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures that are part of the body's immune system. Lymph nodes filter substances that travel through the lymphatic fluid. They contain lymphocytes (white blood cells) that help the body fight infection and disease. If your lymph nodes feel larger than they should be, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes (this is also called “nodal disease”). To find out, your doctor will use a needle biopsy to take a sample from the lymph node for testing. Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is referred to as “local” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC.
314	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
315	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
316	Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid. Lymph nodes While lymph travels throughout your body in lymphatic vessels, it passes through hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Lymph nodes can’t usually be seen or felt. The highest numbers of lymph nodes are found in the neck, groin, and armpits. Spleen The spleen is the largest organ of the lymphatic system. It is about 4 inches long and shaped like a fist. It makes lymphocytes and plays an important role in blood filtration and storage. Lymphatic system There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures, called lymph nodes, throughout the human body. They catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Bone marrow Most bones have soft, spongy tissue in the center called bone marrow. This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest.
317	A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well.
318	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
319	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
320	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
321	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
322	An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Your team might include the following doctors: A hematologist or hematologic oncologist is a medical expert in blood diseases and blood cancers and treats these conditions. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic (drug) therapy. A pathologist or hematopathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body. Types include chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important.
323	At the lab, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer. The pathologist will find out how many of the core samples contain cancer and will also measure the percentage of cancer in each core. With this information, the pathologist can estimate the amount of cancer in the prostate. Also, by knowing where each core sample was taken, the pathologist can tell if the cancer is concentrated in a certain section of the prostate. The pathologist will put these results into a report. Ask your doctor to review the pathology report with you. It’s common to have more than one biopsy if you’re on active surveillance. You’ll have one biopsy to determine your diagnosis and another biopsy within a year (called a confirmatory biopsy) to see if any changes have happened over time. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks.
324	At the lab, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer. The pathologist will find out how many of the core samples contain cancer and will also measure the percentage of cancer in each core. With this information, the pathologist can estimate the amount of cancer in the prostate. Also, by knowing where each core sample was taken, the pathologist can tell if the cancer is concentrated in a certain section of the prostate. The pathologist will put these results into a report. Ask your doctor to review the pathology report with you. It’s common to have more than one biopsy if you’re on active surveillance. You’ll have one biopsy to determine your diagnosis and another biopsy within a year (called a confirmatory biopsy) to see if any changes have happened over time. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks.
325	In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone.
326	The contrast makes the lining of your kidneys, ureters, and bladder easier to see. You may have a urogram if you’re feeling symptoms such as pain in your side or back, or if you have blood in your urine. Renal ultrasound shows your kidneys, ureters, and bladder in real time. It’s the same technology used to look at a baby in the womb. A renal ultrasound is a painless, non-surgical test that produces black and white images of your kidneys and other organs. Pyelogram uses x-rays and contrast solution to look for a blockage—such as a tumor, kidney stone, or blood clot—in your ureters or kidneys. This test may also be used to find causes for blood in urine. A pyelogram is usually done in the operating room during a cystoscopy. You’ll be given anesthesia for this procedure. During the cystoscopy, the contrast is given intravenously (into a vein) or injected directly into the ureters. Tips for testing Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results.
327	Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it. Biomarker tests are also sometimes used for surveillance in people who’ve been treated for non–muscleinvasive bladder cancer. Surveillance means watching to see if the cancer comes back after it has been treated or removed. Urine cytology Urine cytology is a lab test that analyzes your urine for any cancer or precancerous cells. You may receive a urine cytology test if you have blood in your urine. A urine cytology is done like other urine tests— you pee into a small plastic container. Or, your urologist may collect a sample of your urine during cystoscopy. Either way, the urine sample is sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a pathologist (a doctor who examines cells and tissue to find disease) uses a microscope to look for any abnormal cells in your urine sample. If abnormal cells are found, it means that cancer may be located anywhere in the urinary tract. You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder.
328	In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. Lymphoblasts can crowd out other blood cells causing blood to not work as it should. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book is for those being treated at an adult cancer center. Blood Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout the body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. More than half of your blood is plasma. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (erythrocytes) White blood cells (leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, lymphocytes, and others Platelets (thrombocytes) Blood cells have important jobs. Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs) fight infections. Platelets (PLTs) help control bleeding. Blood stem cells Bone marrow contains stem cells.
329	Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Since cancer cells can spread through the blood, it is still possible to develop metastases even when the axillary lymph nodes are negative for cancer. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as locoregional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes.
330	Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder. The medicine aims to destroy any cancer cells that TURBT left behind and to prevent any new cancer cells from forming. urinate, pain or difficulty when urinating, and blood or particles (clots) in your urine. Talk to your treatment team about the side effects. There may be ways to help lessen these effects. If intravesical BCG doesn’t work on its own, a number of other treatment options are available in addition to treatment in clinical trials. Ask your provider or another member of your care team about these potential options. Intravesical chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug used to kill actively growing cancer cells. Intravesical chemotherapy is given to treat the cancer and to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Intravesical chemotherapy can be given soon after a TURBT procedure. The treatment is a one-time dose instilled within 24 hours of TURBT surgery. It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing.
331	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
332	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
333	Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances.
334	Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. Cell-free DNA testing Cell-free or circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing uses a sample of blood to look for cancer cells or for pieces of DNA from tumor cells. Although this test is not a recommended standard and its use has not been agreed upon, many providers use it to monitor treatment response and for cancer recurrence. Key points Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health.
335	Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease. The hematopathologist and your oncologist will examine a drop of your blood using a microscope. This is called a blood smear. The way the abnormal cells look can be a clue as to what type of cancer you have. Your blood will also be tested using a method called flow cytometry. It can detect common patterns of proteins on the outside of cells. Most cells have an identifiable pattern of proteins, like a silhouette or a shape, called the immunophenotype. A CLL diagnosis requires at least 5,000 or more of the same white blood cells called monoclonal B lymphocytes to be found per microliter in your blood. Diagnosis by biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes samples from the body for testing. If the blood results aren’t clear, you’ll have a biopsy of your lymph nodes or bone marrow to confirm CLL. Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).
336	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
337	A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan). PET/CT imaging may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. A PET/CT scan takes images of the whole body to find cancer. Imaging after diagnosis may also include an ultrasound of the testicles. However, if the whole-body PET/CT scan didn’t find anything, then this imaging test may not be needed. Blood tests Blood tests can also help establish the extent of the cancer and provide other information needed for planning your treatment. The following blood tests are recommended: Complete blood count (CBC) is a common blood test that measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) is a group of 14 different blood tests that provides information about your blood sugar, calcium, and electrolyte levels, and the health of your liver and kidneys. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme.
338	Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment.
339	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
340	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
341	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
342	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
343	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
344	Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it.
345	Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body. Your provider will consider the following factors to help decide if RAI may be helpful: The size of the tumor The tumor subtype Whether the cancer invaded lymph or blood vessels Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes The thyroglobulin (Tg) level after surgery Age at diagnosis RAI therapy is usually recommended if any of the following is true: The cancer had spread significantly beyond the thyroid The cancer had invaded blood vessels (applies to follicular and oncocytic tumors) The Tg level was high 6 to 12 weeks after surgery There were large, or more than 5, lymph nodes with cancer The tumor is a differentiated high-grade carcinoma Monitoring and follow-up care Follow-up testing and surveillance are somewhat different after lobectomy versus after total thyroidectomy. After total thyroidectomy Short-term follow-up after total thyroidectomy involves a physical exam and blood tests. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page.
346	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
347	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
348	It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate. High doses of methotrexate are needed to overcome the blood-brain barrier and still have enough strength to kill lymphoma cells. The blood-brain barrier is a protective layer around the brain that prevents germs, infections, and other toxins from getting in. But it also blocks some chemotherapy drugs like methotrexate from reaching the brain. For induction therapy, high-dose methotrexate is given together with the immunotherapy drug rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab can be given on its own but it usually works better when given with chemotherapy. In addition to methotrexate and rituximab, one or more other chemotherapy medicines such as temozolomide, vincristine, and procarbazine may also be included. Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone.
349	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
350	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
351	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
352	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
353	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
354	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
355	Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body. The images can show the size, location, and other features of cancer. Imaging can reveal where the cancer started and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in interpreting imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor or care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor or other health care provider will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you have. Is blue light cystoscopy better? Cystoscopy commonly uses a white light to see inside the bladder. Some newer cystoscopes now use a blue light. When combined with a special dye injected into the bladder, blue light cystoscopy can identify tumors a little more distinctly than white light. Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye.
356	Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body. The images can show the size, location, and other features of cancer. Imaging can reveal where the cancer started and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in interpreting imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor or care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor or other health care provider will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you have. Is blue light cystoscopy better? Cystoscopy commonly uses a white light to see inside the bladder. Some newer cystoscopes now use a blue light. When combined with a special dye injected into the bladder, blue light cystoscopy can identify tumors a little more distinctly than white light. Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye.
357	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
358	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
359	Most are capsules that you swallow. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy doesn't work well against most thyroid cancers. It may be used for cancer that isn't responding to other treatment, or that has spread to distant areas of the body. It is most often used in combination with radiation therapy for anaplastic thyroid cancer—the least common and most aggressive type. Most chemotherapy medicines are put directly into the bloodstream through a vein. Systemic therapy side effects Side effects of systemic therapy can include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Constipation Hair loss Mouth sores Loss of appetite Low blood cell counts (white cells, red cells, and platelets) Side effects seen more often with targeted therapy include body aches, rash, high blood pressure, and abnormal bleeding. Some targeted therapies have serious side effects that can affect your heart, skin, and digestive system. If systemic therapy is planned, ask your care team for a complete list of potential side effects. Most side effects only occur during cancer treatment. But, some can start years later. For example, long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and not being able to have children.
360	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
361	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
362	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
363	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
364	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
365	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
366	You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended. This testing is described in more detail on page Recommended targeted therapies for metastatic cancer that can't be treated with surgery or RAI are listed in Guide Other systemic therapies are available and may be recommended if those listed in Guide 1 aren't available or appropriate. Joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged for everyone with metastatic thyroid cancer. About bone cancer 5 What is bone cancer? 6 What is bone? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Bone cancer includes a group of cancers that start in the bone or cartilage. This is called primary bone cancer and differs from other types of cancers that can spread (metastasize) to the bone. This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers.
367	TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and biopsy results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other organs. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, MThis might represent a stage 1 cancer. h T (tumor) – Size and depth of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread (metastasized) to distant parts of the body Cancer staging is often done twice. Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and other tests. Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery such as in the removal of a lymph node. Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell.
368	A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. PET/CT scan of prostate cancer This image combines PET and CT scans to show a cross-section of a patient’s pelvis. The greenish circle identifies cancer in the prostate, while the intense red dot indicates cancer that has spread to a pelvic lymph node. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, or other health problems. Biopsy Although a high PSA level and an abnormal digital rectal exam are signs of possible prostate cancer, the only way to confirm cancer is to have a biopsy. A biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of cells or tissue is removed from your body and tested for cancer. A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk.
369	Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign of bone tumors, liver disorders, or pregnancy. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. RBCs carry oxygen throughout your body, WBCs fight infection, and PLTs control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. A CMP will look for higher than normal calcium levels in your blood called hypercalcemia. Calcium is needed for healthy teeth, bones, and other body tissues. Bone damage from cancer can cause your bones to release calcium into the bloodstream, which can lead to illness and other health issues. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
370	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
371	It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. However, the test is quick and painless. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health issues. Bone x-ray An x-ray uses low-dose radiation to take one picture at a time. A tumor changes the way radiation is absorbed and will show up on the x-ray. X-rays are also good at showing bone issues. Your care team may order x-rays if your bones hurt or were abnormal on a bone scan. Diagnostic mammogram A mammogram is a picture of the insides of your breast. The pictures are made using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. A bilateral mammogram includes pictures of both breasts. Mammogram results are used to plan treatment. Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s).
372	Longterm risks of not having enough estrogen include cardiovascular disease and bone loss (osteoporosis). If hysterectomy is being considered, ask your doctor if keeping your ovaries is appropriate. Lymph node dissection Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells. Lymph nodes are bean-shaped glands found throughout the body. They contain immune cells that help the body fight infection and disease. During surgery for cervical cancer, lymph nodes may be removed in order to be tested for cancer. This is called lymph node dissection or lymphadenectomy. In order to identify and remove the lymph node(s) most likely to contain cancer, a sentinel lymph node biopsy may be performed. This involves injecting a special dye or a radioactive substance into the cervix near the cancer. Lymph nodes containing the dye or substance can be seen using a special camera. These are the sentinel nodes. They are removed and tested for cancer. Testing the removed nodes helps determine the extent (spread) of the cancer. Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes.
373	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
374	The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are bedside procedures. They are not surgeries and do not require an operating room. Your care team will try to make you as comfortable as possible during the procedures. In some places, sedation or anesthesia is provided during these procedures. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a small piece of bone. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy.
375	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
376	Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). An excisional biopsy is when a whole lymph node is removed by a surgeon, while an incisional biopsy removes only part of a lymph node. There are many lymph nodes throughout your body, so if you have a lymph node removed, you won’t lose your ability to fight infections and disease. Needle biopsies take a small sample of a lymph node using a needle. They can be done when other biopsies are not safe to perform. A lab test will be used to find the immunophenotype of the biopsied cells. A bone marrow biopsy removes a core sample of marrow. A bone marrow aspiration removes liquid and cells from the marrow. These procedures are usually done at the same time. They’re performed on the back of the hip bone. You may receive an injected pain blocker or light sedative to help you relax. Tests of bone marrow aren’t usually needed for diagnosis, so you might not get one. How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers.
377	The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are bedside procedures. They are not surgeries and do not require an operating room. Your care team will try to make you as comfortable as possible during the procedures. In some places, sedation or anesthesia is provided during these procedures. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a small piece of bone. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy.
378	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
379	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
380	You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! 2 Testing for AML Overview General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Bone marrow tests Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Overview Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. A diagnosis of AML is based on the presence of myeloid blasts in the bone marrow or blood. The number of blasts required to be diagnosed with AML can vary. In general, the number of blasts must be 20 percent or more of all cells found in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts.
381	Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger.
382	These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans. PSMA/PET PSMA/PET imaging is a special kind of PET imaging that locates a protein called prostatespecific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. PSMA/PET is especially useful for detecting cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes or has metastasized to farther areas. It’s also used to monitor prostate cancer that may return after treatment (recurrence). So, someone with early-stage prostate cancer may not need PSMA/PET imaging when first diagnosed. Your team will discuss whether a PSMA/PET scan could be helpful for your specific cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastases, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream.
383	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
384	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
385	Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). Bone tumors often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly (the metaphysis). This book will discuss the following: Chondrosarcoma – starts in the cells that form cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones to form a smooth surface that makes a joint. Also, cartilage gives structure to the nose, ears, larynx, and other parts of the body. Chordoma – starts in notochordal cells that form the spine and vertebrae. Chordomas are usually found in the lower spinal column (sacrum) or at the base of the skull. Ewing sarcoma – starts in the bone marrow and commonly occurs in the diaphysis of long bones or flat bones like the pelvis or scapula (shoulder blade). Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) – is an overgrowth of cells found in the part of the bone called the metaphysis and extends into the area of the bone that widens to form a joint (epiphysis).
386	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
387	It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. However, the test is quick and painless. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health issues. Bone x-ray An x-ray uses low-dose radiation to take one picture at a time. A tumor changes the way radiation is absorbed and will show up on the x-ray. X-rays are also good at showing bone issues. Your care team may order x-rays if your bones hurt or were abnormal on a bone scan. Diagnostic mammogram A mammogram is a picture of the insides of your breast. The pictures are made using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. A bilateral mammogram includes pictures of both breasts. Mammogram results are used to plan treatment. Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s).
388	In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone.
389	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
390	Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck. Moderately or very advanced disease – This includes cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the base of the skull, larynx, oropharynx, bones and muscles behind the nasal cavity, jaw, and roof of the mouth. It might include cancer in the carotid artery. Metastatic – This is cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers have spread through the blood and are metastatic. NPC stages Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) or cancer starts in the nasopharynx. The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx. See Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Head and neck tumors are measured in centimeters (cm). A baseball is 7 cm, a golf ball is 4 cm, and a pea is 1 cm. T0 – No tumor is found, but neck lymph nodes test positive for Epstein-Barr virus.
391	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
392	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
393	When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still.
394	In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma. Stool exits the body through the stoma and enters a bag attached to the skin. This is typically only needed for a short time. For colon cancer surgery, the colostomy can often be reversed with another operation. Colostomy is also known as diversion because it diverts (redirects) the flow of stool. Colostomy If the two healthy ends of the remaining colon cannot be safely reconnected after the cancer is removed, a colostomy may be performed. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening in your abdomen that allows stool to pass through. For colon cancer surgery, it is rare for a colostomy not to be reversed with another operation. Bowel blockage In rare cases, a tumor may grow so large that it blocks the flow of stool. There are several ways to deal with a blockage. One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy.
395	The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia). If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the colon wall, towards the inside of the abdomen. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the colon. 自 Your care team will give you information on: How to prepare for surgery What to expect during and after surgery Recovery Possible short- and long-term side effects of colectomy, including: Leaking from the spot where the colon was reconnected (anastomotic leak) Changes in bowel habits Bowel blocked by scar tissue Organs pushing through tissues or muscles weakened by surgery (hernia) Cancer cells can also break off from the colon tumor and travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer.
396	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
397	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
398	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
399	It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen. You’ll need to stay in the hospital for at least several days. It may take 2 to 3 months or longer for you to recover. Common side effects and complications of a radical cystectomy include constipation, diarrhea, bleeding, bowel problems, infections, and changes in sexual function. Talk to your Cystectomy Cystectomy is surgery to remove the bladder. A radical cystectomy removes the entire bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs. It’s the most common surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A partial cystectomy removes part of the bladder. It’s rarely used for bladder cancer. urologist and treatment team about the risks, benefits, and side effects of a radical cystectomy. Because a radical cystectomy removes your entire bladder, you’ll need a new way for urine to exit your body. So another procedure, called a urinary diversion, is also done at the same time. To find out about the 3 types of urinary diversion, see the next page. Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer.
400	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
401	They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion. Photodynamic therapy In photodynamic therapy (PDT), a lightsensitive drug is applied to the area. When exposed to light (either red or blue light in the doctor’s office, or shaded outdoor light), the drug becomes active and kills cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy A drug applied to the skin becomes active and kills cancer cells when exposed to light. Common side effects of PDT include itching or burning when the liquid is applied, pain during the red or blue light exposure, and itching and redness for a few days after treatment. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy (also called cryosurgery) freezes and destroys precancerous and cancerous cells using a very cold liquid or tool. Liquid nitrogen is often used. Cryotherapy sometimes causes a burning sensation during treatment. A blister and scab will form, which heals over 2 to 3 weeks. Skin darkening or lightening can happen while it is healing. Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses.
402	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
403	Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found. Chapter 6: BPDCN discusses treatment of an aggressive subtype of AML. BPDCN can be found in blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and/or skin. Chapter 7: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of an AML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask.
404	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
405	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
406	A tandem and ovoid applicator uses hollow, rounded capsules instead of a ring. General anesthesia or deep sedation is often required, especially for the first applicator placement. The applicator is placed to align with the tissue targeted for treatment. Often, an imaging technique (MRI or CT) is used to guide placement of the applicator. These images are used to design the brachytherapy treatment plan. The applicator is connected to a brachytherapy machine. A radiation source travels from the machine through the hollow tubes and into the applicator. Treatment takes about 10 minutes. Sometimes brachytherapy is given as treatments over a couple days. In this case, the instruments are placed and left in the body until all the treatments have been given (1 to 2 days). You will need to remain in bed until treatment is complete so that the instruments don’t move. Brachytherapy is typically started in the final week or right after completing EBRT. Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks.
407	A tandem and ovoid applicator uses hollow, rounded capsules instead of a ring. General anesthesia or deep sedation is often required, especially for the first applicator placement. The applicator is placed to align with the tissue targeted for treatment. Often, an imaging technique (MRI or CT) is used to guide placement of the applicator. These images are used to design the brachytherapy treatment plan. The applicator is connected to a brachytherapy machine. A radiation source travels from the machine through the hollow tubes and into the applicator. Treatment takes about 10 minutes. Sometimes brachytherapy is given as treatments over a couple days. In this case, the instruments are placed and left in the body until all the treatments have been given (1 to 2 days). You will need to remain in bed until treatment is complete so that the instruments don’t move. Brachytherapy is typically started in the final week or right after completing EBRT. Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks.
408	Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 7: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence Although the thyroid has been removed, cancer can return to the neck or to areas far from the neck. The return of cancer after treatment is called recurrence. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are targetable features of a cancer. Many are mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. For thyroid cancers with 1 or more specific biomarkers, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be a treatment option if needed. Biomarker testing involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. Testing for the following biomarkers is recommended for recurrent, advanced, or metastatic cancers that can't be treated with RAI therapy: h ALK gene fusion NTRK gene fusion BRAF gene mutations RET gene fusion (found in some medullary thyroid cancers) Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) Tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) Your provider may test for these individually or as part of a group. Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS).
409	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
410	Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus.
411	You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. 2 Tests for primary CNS Tests for diagnosis Tests after diagnosis What’s next? Key points Different tests are needed to identify primary CNS lymphoma and to make a treatment plan. The key to confirming the diagnosis is removing a small sample of the tumor tissue and testing it. Many diseases have signs and symptoms similar to primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, including neurological illnesses and other types of brain cancer. So it’s important to have tests to confirm your diagnosis. If you're given a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll have more tests to find out how far the cancer extends within the central nervous system or if it has spread to another area of the body. Tests are also used to help plan your treatment. Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health.
412	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
413	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
414	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
415	Ask your care team about the risks and benefits of each option. Together, you and your team can make a treatment plan. There’s no single drug or procedure that’s best for treating primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma. The best treatment is the one that works best for you. Treatment options include corticosteroids, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell rescue. Receiving treatment in a clinical trial is also a recommended option. Therapies are often combined to treat cancer. For example, chemotherapy may be given with an immunotherapy drug, or several chemotherapy drugs may be given together. Chemotherapy is also an essential part of having a stem cell rescue. Surgery is not normally an option. Because primary CNS lymphoma usually develops deep within the brain tissue, removing it with surgery is risky and may be more harmful than helpful. Treatment is usually given in phases (which are discussed in the next chapter). Clinical trial NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. Clinical trials are a key way to assess new treatment approaches.
416	Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see. The contrast is injected into the bloodstream through an intravenous (IV) line before or during the imaging test and later flushed out in urine. The contrast agent used for primary CNS lymphoma is called gadolinium. You’ll have multiple MRI tests throughout diagnosis and treatment. An MRI should be done early on if your symptoms suggest a brain tumor. It’s also used right after treatment to see how well the treatment worked. You’ll have more MRIs during follow-up to watch for any recurrence or new growth. CT If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan uses x-rays to take many images of your body from different angles. A computer then combines the pictures to make a 3D image. After imaging After the MRI or CT scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist, an expert in analyzing images of the nervous system. The radiologist will convey the imaging results to your care team. This information helps your team plan what the next steps of your care should be.
417	A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed).
418	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
419	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
420	Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab). The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your biological parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, other family members might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. BRCA tests Everyone has BRCA genes. Normal BRCA genes help to prevent tumor growth. They help fix damaged cells and help cells grow normally. BRCA mutations put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 increase the risk of breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, and melanoma skin cancers. Mutated BRCA genes can also affect how well some treatments work. These tests might be repeated. What is your family cancer health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from biological parent to child. This information is called a family health history.
421	Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab). The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your biological parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, other family members might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. BRCA tests Everyone has BRCA genes. Normal BRCA genes help to prevent tumor growth. They help fix damaged cells and help cells grow normally. BRCA mutations put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 increase the risk of breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, and melanoma skin cancers. Mutated BRCA genes can also affect how well some treatments work. These tests might be repeated. What is your family cancer health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from biological parent to child. This information is called a family health history.
422	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
423	For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing. A pathologist is a doctor who is an expert in testing cells to find disease. The pathologist views the samples with a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the cells are cancerous, the pathologist notes their appearance and other features. Prior surgery or biopsy The cancer may have been found during a surgery or biopsy performed by another doctor. In this case, your treatment team will need to review the prior surgery and testing results. A pathologist will examine the tumor tissue with a microscope to make sure it is ovarian cancer. Your doctors will also want to know if any cancer was left in your body after surgery. Family history and genetic testing Ovarian cancer usually occurs for unknown reasons. However, about 1 in 6 ovarian cancers is caused by mutations (changes) in genes that are passed down from parent to child. This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2).
424	For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing. A pathologist is a doctor who is an expert in testing cells to find disease. The pathologist views the samples with a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the cells are cancerous, the pathologist notes their appearance and other features. Prior surgery or biopsy The cancer may have been found during a surgery or biopsy performed by another doctor. In this case, your treatment team will need to review the prior surgery and testing results. A pathologist will examine the tumor tissue with a microscope to make sure it is ovarian cancer. Your doctors will also want to know if any cancer was left in your body after surgery. Family history and genetic testing Ovarian cancer usually occurs for unknown reasons. However, about 1 in 6 ovarian cancers is caused by mutations (changes) in genes that are passed down from parent to child. This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2).
425	Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above. Your chances of getting prostate cancer increase as you become older. Family history Your family health history is information about the diseases and health conditions in your family. A family history reflects a pattern of certain diseases among family members. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at a higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer or other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. But genetic abnormalities that aren’t inherited can occur, too. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed.
426	The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place. Breast tissue contains glands that can make milk. These milk glands are called lobules. Lobules look like tiny clusters of grapes. Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. Lymph drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Lymph is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast.
427	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
428	When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive . You might hear it called HER2 overexpression or amplification. There are 2 tests for HER2: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measures receptors. If the IHC score is , the cancer is . If the score is 0 or 1, it is considered HER2-. If the score is , further testing is needed. In situ hybridization (ISH) counts the number of copies of the HER2 gene. This test is done mainly when the IHC score is unclear. HER2 testing should be done on all new tumors. A tumor biopsy sample will be used. You might have more than one HER2 test. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. These cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC can find estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptors in breast cancer cells. A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell.
429	There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. If you are looking for more information on breast cancer, read NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Ductal Carcinoma In Situ, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Invasive, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Metastatic, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines Early detection Breast cancer screening aims to find breast cancer early. Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth.
430	Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a highthroughput method used to determine the DNA sequence or gene changes of cancer cells in your tumor. This method would only be used if enough tumor tissue remains after other biomarker testing has been completed. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a lab process that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies called PCR product might be used for NGS. Genetic risk testing About 1 out of 10 breast cancers are hereditary. Depending on your family history or other features of your cancer, your health care provider might refer you for hereditary genetic testing to learn more about your cancer. A genetic counselor or trained provider will speak to you about the results. Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab).
431	The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues.
432	Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth. It will also discuss screening and testing options for those who are pregnant or lactating (breastfeeding), and those with breast pain, nipple discharge, changes in the skin, lumps, or other symptoms that require further testing. Transgender individuals Due to lack of evidence, this book does not provide screening guidance for transgender individuals. Transgender individuals should consult with their primary care physician to determine when/whether screening would be appropriate. Those assigned male at birth Those assigned male at birth do not undergo regular mammogram screening. However, if you have breast pain or redness, or a change in the size and shape of one breast, then see your health care provider and read about recommended tests in Chapter Health care providers During regular health checkups and breast cancer screening, you might come in contact with the following health care providers (HCPs): Breast specialist is an expert in breast health and disease. Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed.
433	Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. ECOG PS The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In breast cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Key points Tests are used to find cancer, plan treatment, and check how well treatment is working. You will have a physical exam, including a breast exam, to see if anything feels or looks abnormal.
434	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
435	Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s). Diagnostic mammograms include extra compression in certain areas of the breast, magnification views, or rolling the breast to image additional areas of the breast. Other tests may include a breast MRI or ultrasound. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it.
436	Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth. It will also discuss screening and testing options for those who are pregnant or lactating (breastfeeding), and those with breast pain, nipple discharge, changes in the skin, lumps, or other symptoms that require further testing. Transgender individuals Due to lack of evidence, this book does not provide screening guidance for transgender individuals. Transgender individuals should consult with their primary care physician to determine when/whether screening would be appropriate. Those assigned male at birth Those assigned male at birth do not undergo regular mammogram screening. However, if you have breast pain or redness, or a change in the size and shape of one breast, then see your health care provider and read about recommended tests in Chapter Health care providers During regular health checkups and breast cancer screening, you might come in contact with the following health care providers (HCPs): Breast specialist is an expert in breast health and disease. Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed.
437	A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy. In a modified radical mastectomy, the breast and underarm (axilla) sentinel lymph nodes are removed. Before removing the breast, the surgeon may do a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). Sentinel lymph nodes are the first lymph nodes cancer cells are likely to have spread from the primary tumor. Breast reconstruction is an option after a mastectomy. If you opt for reconstruction, it will be done after finishing cancer treatment. This is called delayed reconstruction. Breast reconstruction is often done in stages. You might want to consult with a plastic surgeon. When preparing for surgery, seek the opinion of an experienced surgeon. The surgeon should be an expert in performing your type of surgery. Hospitals that perform many surgeries often have better results. You can ask for a referral to a hospital or cancer center that has experience in treating your type of cancer. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors.
438	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
439	Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth. It will also discuss screening and testing options for those who are pregnant or lactating (breastfeeding), and those with breast pain, nipple discharge, changes in the skin, lumps, or other symptoms that require further testing. Transgender individuals Due to lack of evidence, this book does not provide screening guidance for transgender individuals. Transgender individuals should consult with their primary care physician to determine when/whether screening would be appropriate. Those assigned male at birth Those assigned male at birth do not undergo regular mammogram screening. However, if you have breast pain or redness, or a change in the size and shape of one breast, then see your health care provider and read about recommended tests in Chapter Health care providers During regular health checkups and breast cancer screening, you might come in contact with the following health care providers (HCPs): Breast specialist is an expert in breast health and disease. Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed.
440	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases.
441	There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there can be more than one sentinel lymph node. Removal of the sentinel lymph nodes during surgery is called a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB or SNB). This procedure is done during surgery such as a mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) or lumpectomy (surgery to remove the tumor) to determine if any cancer cells have traveled to the lymph nodes. The lymph nodes removed are called the sentinel nodes. They may or may not contain any cancer cells. Just because these nodes are removed, it does not mean that they are positive for cancer. To find the sentinel lymph nodes, a radioactive material and other dyes are injected into the area where breast tumor is located. From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes.
442	A tumor micrometastasis is a very small collection of cancerous cells smaller than 1 mm. It might be written as T1mi. Ipsilateral means on the same side of the body. T1 Tumor is 2 cm or less T2 Tumor is 1 cm to 5 cm T3 Tumor is more than 5 cm T4 Tumor is of any size and has invaded nearby structures such as the chest wall and skin of the breast • T4d Tumor is inflammatory carcinoma (inflammatory breast cancer) Regional lymph node Lymph, a clear fluid containing cells that help fight infections and other diseases, drains through channels into lymphatic vessels. From here, lymph drains into lymph nodes. There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor in the breast. If breast cancer spreads, it often goes first to nearby lymph nodes under the arm. It can also sometimes spread to lymph nodes near the collarbone or near the breastbone. Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer.
443	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
444	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
445	In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your child's care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems due to pressure on the windpipe and blood vessels. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow.
446	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help identify cancer in primary sites, lymph nodes, and/or distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel.
447	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. Confirmed CSCC Once a diagnosis of CSCC is made, your doctor will follow up with: A complete head-to-toe skin exam to look for other lesions An exam of the lymph nodes Cancer cells can travel through blood and a fluid called lymph to form tumors in other parts of the body. Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures that are part of the body's immune system. Lymph nodes filter substances that travel through the lymphatic fluid. They contain lymphocytes (white blood cells) that help the body fight infection and disease. If your lymph nodes feel larger than they should be, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes (this is also called “nodal disease”). To find out, your doctor will use a needle biopsy to take a sample from the lymph node for testing. Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is referred to as “local” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC.
448	It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist about any metal in your body. Contrast may or may not be used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. The space is small and enclosed. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. MRI scans take longer to perform than CT scans. PET scan A PET (positron emission tomography) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and how much sugar is being taken up by the cancer cells. This gives an idea about how fast the cancer cells are growing. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan.
449	A computer combines the pictures to make three-dimensional (3-D) images. During the scan, you will lie face up on a table that moves through a large tunnel-like machine. To see everything better, a substance called contrast may be injected into your vein and also mixed with a liquid you drink. Contrast makes the CT pictures clearer. The contrast may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. You will be able to hear and talk to the technician at all times. You may hear buzzing or clicking during the scan. PET/CT A CT scan may be combined with another imaging test called positron emission tomography (PET). PET uses small amounts of radioactive materials called radiotracers. About an hour before the scan, you will be injected with a sugar radiotracer. The radiotracer gives off a small amount of energy that can be seen by the imaging machine. Cancer appears brighter in the pictures because cancer cells use sugar more quickly than normal cells. In some cases, PET may be performed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (described next) instead of CT. MRI An MRI makes pictures of areas inside the body without using radiation.
450	Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli.
451	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
452	Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli.
453	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
454	Early detection The goal of lung cancer screening is to find lung cancer at an early stage, even before there are any symptoms. This is when treatment will be most successful. Early detection of lung cancer helps prevent death. Together, you and your health care provider should discuss if screening is right for you. Key points The lungs are a pair of organs that move important gases in and out of the blood. Lung cancer starts in the cells that line the lungs. Most lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. Lung cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Lung cancer found earlier is more likely to be treated successfully. Lung cancer screening is not recommended for everyone. Screening is for those at risk for developing lung cancer. Ask your health care provider if you qualify for lung cancer screening. Your wishes are always important. Talk to your health care provider and make your wishes known.
455	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
456	For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a core sample. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. Genetic cancer risk testing Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva from spitting into a cup or a cheek swab. The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your birth parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, blood relatives might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. Biomarker testing A sample from your biopsy will undergo lab tests to look for specific DNA mutations/ alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Biomarker testing is performed on a case-by-case basis and may increase the time it takes for biopsy results. Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing.
457	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
458	Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen. It is often an upand-down (vertical) cut from the top of the belly button down to the pelvic bone. This lets your doctor see the tumor and other organs and tissues in your abdomen and pelvis. This method is recommended most often when surgical staging (described next) or cytoreductive surgery is planned. Less often, a minimally invasive type of surgery called laparoscopy may be used. The surgery is performed through a few small cuts in the abdomen. Laparoscopy may be used in select cases, such as when cancer is only in the ovaries. This surgery should only be done by a gynecologic oncologist experienced in this method. Hysterectomy and BSO The most commonly used surgery for ovarian cancer removes the uterus, both ovaries, and both fallopian tubes. Surgical staging If it does not look like the cancer has spread, surgical staging should be performed. Surgical staging is the most accurate way to stage ovarian cancer. This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells.
459	It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer Mouth or oral cancer can develop in the lips (mucosal lip), the lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa), the front two-thirds of the tongue, the upper and lower gums (gingiva), the floor of the mouth under the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate), and the small area behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone). 2 Testing for mouth cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your cancer stage treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider.
460	What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone.
461	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
462	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
463	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
464	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
465	In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone.
466	They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion. Photodynamic therapy In photodynamic therapy (PDT), a lightsensitive drug is applied to the area. When exposed to light (either red or blue light in the doctor’s office, or shaded outdoor light), the drug becomes active and kills cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy A drug applied to the skin becomes active and kills cancer cells when exposed to light. Common side effects of PDT include itching or burning when the liquid is applied, pain during the red or blue light exposure, and itching and redness for a few days after treatment. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy (also called cryosurgery) freezes and destroys precancerous and cancerous cells using a very cold liquid or tool. Liquid nitrogen is often used. Cryotherapy sometimes causes a burning sensation during treatment. A blister and scab will form, which heals over 2 to 3 weeks. Skin darkening or lightening can happen while it is healing. Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses.
467	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
468	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
469	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
470	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
471	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
472	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
473	Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS). Cancer that returns to the neck If the cancer can be removed based on its size and location, surgery is the preferred treatment. For cancers that take up iodine, treatment with RAI therapy will also be considered. But, treatment isn't always needed. If the cancer isn't getting worse and isn't close to any critical structures, your provider may recommend close monitoring instead of treatment. If the cancer can't be removed with surgery, doesn’t take up iodine, and is getting worse (progressing), treatment with radiation therapy, targeted therapy, or both may be an option. The preferred targeted therapy for cancer that can’t be removed with surgery and is progressing is lenvatinib (Lenvima). Another recommended option is sorafenib (Nexavar). If the cancer gets worse after treatment with 1 or both of these, cabozantinib (Cabometyx) is recommended. For cancers with certain gene mutations or other features, biomarker-based therapy may also be an option for recurrence. See Guide 1 on the next page. If the therapies discussed above aren’t available or appropriate, joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged.
474	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
475	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
476	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
477	The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for basal cell skin cancer 10 General health tests 12 Biopsy 13 Imaging 13 What’s next 14 Key points 14 Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and then treat basal cell skin cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Whether you or your doctor found a concerning lesion on your skin, testing is needed to identify and diagnose basal cell skin cancer. The diagnosis is based on the results in your medical and family history, a physical exam, skin exam, and biopsy, and, in some cases, imaging studies. See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan.
478	What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone.
479	A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel. The scan won’t hurt, but if you need contrast you will need to get a needle placed in your arm. A radiologist will review your scans and send the results to your oncologist. 66 I am so grateful I had a consultation with a CLL specialist. It was reassuring to finally speak to a CLL specialist. The doctor answered all my questions thoroughly. I am very satisfied with the advice I received." What if I’m pregnant? Some cancer treatments can harm an unborn baby. If you have the potential to become pregnant, your cancer care team will give you a pregnancy test before treatment. Your treatment options will depend on the results. Preserving fertility Many people have healthy babies despite cancer and its treatment. If you wish to have kids, there are important steps to take before treatment. Even if you are unsure, talk to your cancer care team. Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility.
480	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
481	Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes).
482	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
483	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
484	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
485	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant should be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins. Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body to look for cancer deposits. A medical doctor called a radiologist will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You may not have all of the following tests. X-ray An x-ray is a type of radiation. In small doses, it is used to make pictures of the inside of the body. It might be referred to as a radiograph. Bone scan A bone scan uses a radiotracer. A radiotracer is a substance that releases small amounts of radiation. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer will be injected into your vein. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body.
486	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
487	These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypT Anyone can give up; It’s the easiest thing in the world to do, but to hold it together when everyone would expect for you to fall apart, now that is true strength.” Lymph nodes in the head and neck There are over 300 lymph nodes in the head and neck. Most tumors spread to nearby lymph nodes. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage mouth cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage.
488	Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen.
489	They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor. Cancer in the lymph nodes is called nodal disease and is rare in bone cancer. NX – Cancer in nearby lymph nodes cannot be measured. N0 – There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes. N1 – Cancer is found in the regional lymph nodes. M Metastasis Bone cancer can spread through blood or the lymphatic system. Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is defined as MWhen cancer is not metastatic it is labeled as MBone cancer can spread to the lung, other bones, or other parts of the body. Bone cancer that has metastasized to the lung is still called bone cancer. M0 – No distant metastasis M1 – Distant metastasis is found • M1a – Metastasis is in the lung • M1b – Metastasis is in the bone or other distant sites The pelvis The pelvis is a basin-shaped structure that supports the spinal column and protects the abdominal organs. G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade.
490	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
491	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
492	Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes).
493	Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes).
494	The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer. In the AJCC system, the following key pieces of information about the cancer are used to give it a stage: T: How far the tumor has grown into or through the colon wall N: Whether any lymph nodes have cancer M: Whether the cancer has spread to areas or organs outside the colon (metastasized) The T, N, and M scores are combined to assign the cancer one of the following stages: 0, I (1), II (2), III (3), or IV (4). The stages are explained below. Stage 0 There are abnormal cells on the innermost layer of the colon wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into deeper layers of the colon wall. Stage 0 colon cancer is also called carcinoma in situ of the colon. Stage 1 The cancer has grown into either the second or third layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 2 The cancer has grown into, or beyond, the fourth layer of the colon wall.
495	Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
496	Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes).
497	The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer. In the AJCC system, the following key pieces of information about the cancer are used to give it a stage: T: How far the tumor has grown into or through the colon wall N: Whether any lymph nodes have cancer M: Whether the cancer has spread to areas or organs outside the colon (metastasized) The T, N, and M scores are combined to assign the cancer one of the following stages: 0, I (1), II (2), III (3), or IV (4). The stages are explained below. Stage 0 There are abnormal cells on the innermost layer of the colon wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into deeper layers of the colon wall. Stage 0 colon cancer is also called carcinoma in situ of the colon. Stage 1 The cancer has grown into either the second or third layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 2 The cancer has grown into, or beyond, the fourth layer of the colon wall.
498	Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences. Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines tumors on the bladder wall and removes them. Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It involves removing the bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs in the pelvis. A urinary diversion is a surgical procedure included with a radical cystectomy. Its purpose is to provide a new way for urine to leave the body. Intravesical therapy is the use of cancer medicine placed directly into the bladder through a catheter. The medicine is slowly put into the bladder using a process called instillation. Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). Chemotherapy affects cancer cells (and other cells) throughout the whole body. All treatments for bladder cancer can cause side effects. Ask your care team about ways to deal with the side effects of treatment. What’s your stage? If you’ve reached this page, then you’ve probably been told the stage of your bladder cancer.
499	Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
500	Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1C Cancer is in one or both ovaries and one or more of the following has also happened: • Stage 1C1 – The capsule of the ovary broke open during surgery. This is called surgical spill. • Stage 1C2 – The capsule of the ovary broke open before surgery, or there is cancer on the outer surface of the ovary or fallopian tube. • Stage 1C3 – Cancer cells are found in ascites or washings Stage 2A There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes. Stage 2B Cancer is in one or both ovaries. Cancer has grown into and/or spread implants on other organs or tissues in the pelvis, such as the bladder, colon, or rectum. Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes).
501	Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
502	Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
503	Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility. It can happen to people of any gender. You may receive a referral to a fertility specialist. A fertility specialist is an expert in helping people have babies. They can explain how you may be able to have a baby during or after treatment. Collecting and freezing sperm or eggs is a common method. More information on fertility preservation can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cancer treatment can impact one's ability to have children. Before starting treatment, talk with a fertility counselor to learn what your options are for fertility preservation. What’s a prognosis? Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease based on tests. Prognosis is used to predict how the cancer will turn out. Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know.
504	Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. Cell-free DNA testing Cell-free or circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing uses a sample of blood to look for cancer cells or for pieces of DNA from tumor cells. Although this test is not a recommended standard and its use has not been agreed upon, many providers use it to monitor treatment response and for cancer recurrence. Key points Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health.
505	Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread. It is based on how different the tumor cells look compared to normal cells under a microscope. The more different they look, the higher the risk of spreading. Tumor type To diagnose squamous cell skin cancer, you likely had a small sample of tissue removed for testing (a skin biopsy). That tissue sample was then analyzed by a pathologist in order to determine the specific type (and subtype) of cancer. There are certain rare subtypes of squamous cell skin cancer that are more likely to return after treatment. Connective tissue in the tumor Some tumors form fibrous or connective tissue, which is a sign of a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites.
506	The tissue is tested in a lab to look for cancer cells. chance or environmental factors later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are hereditary gene testing and tumor testing: Hereditary gene testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Your siblings or other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your health care provider might suggest genetic testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. This is also called germline testing. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for inherited (germline) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, this testing typically looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others. Having a hereditary mutation doesn’t mean you’ll automatically get cancer. It means your chances for developing certain cancers is higher.
507	The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor. All types of EBRT are conformal, which means that the radiation beams are shaped to the tumor. What makes IMRT unique compared to other forms of EBRT is that it uses many small beams of different intensities (strengths). This allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as external genitalia and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Radiation therapy is given in small doses, called fractions. As part of chemoradiation for anal cancer, radiation is typically given Monday through Friday for 5 to 6 weeks (25 to 30 treatment sessions). A planning session, called simulation, is needed before treatment begins. If IMRT is planned, you will most likely lie on your back with your knees out to the side (“frog-legged”) for simulation and for treatment. Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan.
508	Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes. Before or during PDEMA, your doctor may consider a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). An SLNB is used to identify the first lymph nodes where cancer might have spread. The surgeon uses a harmless dye and a low-level radioactive solution to find the sentinel nodes. The nodes are then removed and tested for signs of cancer. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA removes the cancer, but other concerning features are noted during surgery, a discussion with different cancer doctors is recommended to determine next steps. Treatment with radiation therapy will be considered. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA does not remove all of the cancer, a discussion between different cancer doctors is recommended to consider next treatment options. If another surgery can be performed, this is often tried first. Otherwise, radiation therapy is recommended. In some cases, systemic therapy is used in addition to radiation. Platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation if you can have it.
509	Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread. It is based on how different the tumor cells look compared to normal cells under a microscope. The more different they look, the higher the risk of spreading. Tumor type To diagnose squamous cell skin cancer, you likely had a small sample of tissue removed for testing (a skin biopsy). That tissue sample was then analyzed by a pathologist in order to determine the specific type (and subtype) of cancer. There are certain rare subtypes of squamous cell skin cancer that are more likely to return after treatment. Connective tissue in the tumor Some tumors form fibrous or connective tissue, which is a sign of a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites.
510	The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth. Information for treatment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Squamous Cell Skin Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location and cancer stage. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book.
511	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
512	Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Throat cancer staging How throat cancer is staged TNM scores p16- (HPV-) cancer stages cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Testing for p16 (HPV) is an important part of staging. This chapter explains throat cancer stages. How throat cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage.
513	Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are.
514	Your health care provider Taking supplements? Bring a list of your medicines to your doctor’s office when you begin testing. It’s also important to tell your treatment team if you’re using any complementary medicines, especially supplements, vitamins, or herbs. Some of these can interfere with your cancer tests or treatment. This may reduce the effectiveness of treatment or cause more side effects. may feel for enlarged glands (lymph nodes) in your groin, underarms, and neck. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of the family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members if any relatives had cancer, at what age they were diagnosed, and if they died from it. Also ask family members about other health issues like heart disease, stroke, and diabetes. Share this information with your care team and update your team with any changes to your family history.
515	You’ll also receive treatment for any side effects caused by cancer therapy. Can bladder cancer be cured? Bladder cancer in an early (non-invasive) stage can usually be cured. Treatment for more advanced stage (muscle-invasive) bladder cancer can be complicated but it may still get rid of the cancer. Metastatic bladder cancer is not typically curable, but it is still treatable. And treatments are improving all the time. For most people with bladder cancer, treatment provides a longer and more comfortable life with fewer symptoms. It’s important to know that bladder cancer commonly comes back even after treatment. In fact, bladder cancer is more likely to come back than almost any other kind of cancer. From now on, you and your health care providers will have to keep watching for any sign that the cancer returns. Even so, there’s hope. If the cancer does come back, it can be treated. Many people live with bladder cancer and still have a good quality of life. Plus, new and improved ways to detect and treat bladder cancer are helping people live longer and with fewer side effects than ever before.
516	A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell. Hormones recognize and bind to specific hormone receptors. When hormones attach to receptors on breast cancer cells, they can cause cancer to grow. If found, these receptors may be targeted using endocrine therapy. There are 2 types of hormone receptors: Estrogen – plays a role in breast development Progesterone – plays a role in menstrual cycle and pregnancy Hormone receptor (HR) testing should be done on any new tumors. A biopsy sample will be used. Hormone receptor-positive In hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, IHC finds estrogen and/or progesterone hormone receptors. Most breast cancers are . Estrogen receptor (ER) is stimulated by estrogen and provides survival and proliferation (rapid growth) signals. Cancer cells deprived of estrogen or which have their ER signal blocked with treatment may stop growing or die. Progesterone receptor (PR) binds progesterone and also provides survival and proliferation signals. It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling.
517	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
518	Imaging helps determine the extent of the cancer before treatment. Initial imaging may include CT, MRI, PET, and/or transvaginal ultrasound. h A cystoscopy and/or proctoscopy under anesthesia may be needed to look for signs of cancer in the bladder and bowel. Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option for cancer that is only in the cervix. The stage is a rating of the extent of the cancer before any treatment is given. It is used to determine your treatment options. The FIGO system is used to stage cervical cancer. Quitting smoking can lead to better cancer treatment outcomes. Help is available if you are ready to stop smoking. 3 Types of treatment Surgery External beam radiation therapy Chemoradiation Brachytherapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points In this chapter, the main treatments for cervical cancer are described. Your treatment options will depend on the extent of the cancer and other factors. Surgery Surgery is often the main treatment for earlystage cervical cancer. The types of surgery that may be used are described below. Removing only a portion of the cervix may be an option for the earliest stage of cervical cancer. In most cases, however, the entire cervix must be removed.
519	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
520	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
521	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
522	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
523	They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion. Photodynamic therapy In photodynamic therapy (PDT), a lightsensitive drug is applied to the area. When exposed to light (either red or blue light in the doctor’s office, or shaded outdoor light), the drug becomes active and kills cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy A drug applied to the skin becomes active and kills cancer cells when exposed to light. Common side effects of PDT include itching or burning when the liquid is applied, pain during the red or blue light exposure, and itching and redness for a few days after treatment. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy (also called cryosurgery) freezes and destroys precancerous and cancerous cells using a very cold liquid or tool. Liquid nitrogen is often used. Cryotherapy sometimes causes a burning sensation during treatment. A blister and scab will form, which heals over 2 to 3 weeks. Skin darkening or lightening can happen while it is healing. Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses.
524	It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below. Resection (surgery) EBRT Ablative therapies Ablative therapies destroy cancerous lesions with little harm to nearby tissue. They are often delivered using a specially designed needle (a probe or electrode) placed directly into or next to the tumor. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT that may be used to treat tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone. Only a few treatment sessions are needed. If treatment with the local therapies listed above is complete, systemic therapy may follow. Systemic therapy Metastatic cervical cancer is usually treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. If you had prior treatment with cisplatin, it may not work as well again on its own. In this case, it is often given with 1 or 2 other medicines, as part of a combination regimen. A factor your doctor will consider when selecting a systemic therapy regimen to use first (as “first-line” therapy) is whether the cancer has the PD-L1 biomarker. At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen.
525	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
526	Curettage and electrodesiccation C&E or shave excision are recommended treatment options for low-risk, local CSCC. Usually it is considered for early, small CSCC on the surface of the skin. If the tumor ends up being deeper than expected into the skin during the procedure, a standard surgical or shave excision should be performed rather than C&E to remove deep areas of cancerous tissue. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is a recommended treatment option for low-risk, local CSCC. If testing after surgery finds cancer cells in the surrounding tissue removed with the tumor, more treatment is needed. Further treatment options include: Mohs surgery or resection with PDEMA Another surgical excision Radiation therapy (if more surgery cannot be done) Mohs surgery or PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is a recommended treatment option for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes.  See Part 2: Types of treatment for more detailed descriptions of these treatments. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works.
527	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
528	But, some can start years later. For example, long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and not being able to have children. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA.
529	Surgery is an option for more people now than in the past due to medical advances. Other types of cancer treatment are used with Pancreatic cancer stages Very rarely, pancreatic cancer is only in the duct (stage 0) or only in the pancreas (stage 1 or some stage 2). Stage 2 and stage 3 also include cancers that have spread to beanshaped structures called lymph nodes (shown). Other stage 3 cancers have grown to nearby arteries, such as the celiac axis. Most often, pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas, which is stage surgery to improve results. Ongoing research is assessing whether it is better to receive these other treatments before or after surgery. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. For most people with pancreatic cancer, surgery is not the best treatment. Instead, drug treatment is most often used to control cancer’s growth and reduce symptoms. Research has compared current cancer drugs to identify the best ones. In recent years, drug regimens based on cancer markers have been used to improve results. Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer.
530	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid.
531	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
532	Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on supportive care is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Stage 3 Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for all stage 3 colon cancers. Preferred regimens include CAPEOX and FOLFOX. Other recommended options include capecitabine and 5-FU. Chemotherapy is typically given for 3 to 6 months. The length of treatment depends on the regimen and the risk of recurrence. Surveillance Follow-up testing is started when there are no signs of cancer after treatment. It can help find new cancer growth early. Stage 1 A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery for stage 1 cancers. If the results are normal, your next colonoscopy should be in 3 years, and then every 5 years. If a concerning or high-risk adenoma is found, your next colonoscopy will be needed within 1 year. If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis.
533	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
534	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
535	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
536	Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall. Stage 0is stands for carcinoma in situ (CIS). This is a flat patch of cancer cells that hasn’t grown any farther than where it started. It’s still on the surface of the bladder lining and has yet to invade deeper layers. However, carcinoma in situ is fast-growing, aggressive, and can be very serious. Stage 1 Stage 1 has grown through the inner lining of the bladder wall and into the layer of connective tissue. But stage 1 hasn’t invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall (non– muscle-invasive). Stage 2 Stage 2 bladder cancer has grown into the muscle layer (muscle-invasive), but it hasn’t reached the fatty layer covering the outside of the bladder nor has it spread anywhere else. Stage 3 Stage 3 has grown through the bladder wall and into the fatty layer surrounding the bladder. It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis).
537	The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer. In the AJCC system, the following key pieces of information about the cancer are used to give it a stage: T: How far the tumor has grown into or through the colon wall N: Whether any lymph nodes have cancer M: Whether the cancer has spread to areas or organs outside the colon (metastasized) The T, N, and M scores are combined to assign the cancer one of the following stages: 0, I (1), II (2), III (3), or IV (4). The stages are explained below. Stage 0 There are abnormal cells on the innermost layer of the colon wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into deeper layers of the colon wall. Stage 0 colon cancer is also called carcinoma in situ of the colon. Stage 1 The cancer has grown into either the second or third layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 2 The cancer has grown into, or beyond, the fourth layer of the colon wall.
538	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
539	It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion.
540	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
541	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
542	Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests.
543	Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out support groups at your local hospital, through social media, or from those listed in the back of this book. Look to friends, relatives, neighbors, and coworkers for social support. encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a “MyChart” or health record account if it’s available, which will help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe.
544	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
545	Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck. Moderately or very advanced disease – Cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the base of the skull, larynx, pharynx, bones and muscles behind the nasal cavity, jaw, and roof of the mouth. It might include cancer in the carotid artery. Metastatic – Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. p16- (HPV-) cancer stages p16- throat cancer starts in the oropharynx and is not caused by human papillomavirus (HPV). The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested.
546	You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
547	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding.
548	You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended. This testing is described in more detail on page Recommended targeted therapies for metastatic cancer that can't be treated with surgery or RAI are listed in Guide Other systemic therapies are available and may be recommended if those listed in Guide 1 aren't available or appropriate. Joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged for everyone with metastatic thyroid cancer. About bone cancer 5 What is bone cancer? 6 What is bone? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Bone cancer includes a group of cancers that start in the bone or cartilage. This is called primary bone cancer and differs from other types of cancers that can spread (metastasize) to the bone. This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers.
549	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
550	Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances.
551	If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome. FAP can cause hundreds to thousands of polyps to form in the colon and rectum. The polyps start as benign growths, but over time can become invasive rectal cancer. There are other inherited syndromes that are even more rare than Lynch syndrome and FAP. If your provider thinks you may have an inherited syndrome, they will refer you to a genetic counselor. This expert can talk with you and your family about getting tested for syndromes related to rectal cancer. If they determine that testing is appropriate, they can order a blood or saliva test to see if you have an inherited gene mutation. Blood tests General health tests A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots.
552	How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease.
553	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
554	How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease.
555	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
556	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
557	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
558	The level of CEA is often higher than normal in people with colon cancer, especially if the cancer has spread to other organs. Monitoring CEA can be helpful even when the cancer is only in the colon and the level is normal, because the level will rise if the cancer later spreads to other organs. However, monitoring CEA is not helpful for everyone, even if the cancer has spread. People who are pregnant and those who smoke may have higher CEA levels. 66 I was diagnosed in the ER at age 44, 58 days after my wedding, and I faced biases and unexpected challenges. I had to fight to get care because I was dismissed for more than a year for so many different reasons. My journey taught me this: never give up, explore every reasonable option, and prioritize your mental health. Your life is the only one you have, so be true to yourself. Before any diagnosis, put on your life jacket first—take care of yourself. Get screened, know your family history. When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer.
559	White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. A chemistry profile (also called a comprehensive metabolic panel), is a group of tests that provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. People with colorectal cancer tend to have more than normal. Monitoring CEA can be helpful for some cancers that are only in the rectum. If the level rises, it could signal that the cancer has spread. If the level is high at diagnosis, it could suggest that the cancer has already spread. Monitoring CEA isn't helpful for everyone. Pregnant people and tobacco users may also have more CEA than average in their blood. 66 Write everything down and keep a binder or folder of information. If your loved one wakes up violently ill at midnight, it’s after hours and you need to know who to call. Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency.
560	If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis. Imaging tests may be ordered if your doctor thinks the cancer may have come back or spread. Stages 2 and 3 In addition to colonoscopy, surveillance for stages 2 and 3 colon cancer includes physical exams, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) blood tests, and CT scans. The recommended schedule for surveillance testing is shown in Guide In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. For more information, see Chapter 5: Survivorship. The pharynx Head and neck cancer Nasopharyngeal cancer Key points Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a type of cancer that affects the nasopharynx. The nasopharynx connects the back of the nose (nasal cavity) to the back of the mouth (pharynx). The pharynx The pharynx is part of the throat and found inside the neck. It is a hollow, muscular tube that starts behind the nose (nasal cavity) and opens into the voice box (larynx) and esophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach). The pharynx (said fair-inks) has 3 parts: Nasopharynx Oropharynx Hypopharynx Cancer can be found in any part of the pharynx.
561	Surgery is an option for more people now than in the past due to medical advances. Other types of cancer treatment are used with Pancreatic cancer stages Very rarely, pancreatic cancer is only in the duct (stage 0) or only in the pancreas (stage 1 or some stage 2). Stage 2 and stage 3 also include cancers that have spread to beanshaped structures called lymph nodes (shown). Other stage 3 cancers have grown to nearby arteries, such as the celiac axis. Most often, pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas, which is stage surgery to improve results. Ongoing research is assessing whether it is better to receive these other treatments before or after surgery. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. For most people with pancreatic cancer, surgery is not the best treatment. Instead, drug treatment is most often used to control cancer’s growth and reduce symptoms. Research has compared current cancer drugs to identify the best ones. In recent years, drug regimens based on cancer markers have been used to improve results. Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer.
562	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
563	It is important to know your HIV status. If you have not been tested for HIV, your provider may recommend that you get tested. If you have HIV, getting the care you need may also improve cancer treatment outcomes. Gynecologic exam A gynecologic exam, including screening for cervical cancer, is recommended. Like anal cancer, HPV is the cause of almost all cervical cancers. Cervical cancer screening involves scraping cells from the cervix and testing them for HPV, cancer, and cell changes that may lead to cancer. If testing for HPV is not performed, it is simply called a Pap test. If the cells are tested for both HPV and cancer, it is called an HPV/Pap co-test. MRI You may have an MRI to determine the extent of the cancer in the pelvis. MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body. Unlike a CT scan, MRI does not use radiation. Staging The results of testing are used to determine the cancer stage. The stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body.
564	Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme. A high level of LDH can be a sign of cell damage caused by cancer or other health problems. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) blood test is needed for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized care and treatment with antiretroviral therapy in addition to cancer treatment. Hepatitis B testing will be necessary if you’re having immunotherapy treatment and you’ve had this virus before (or you’re at risk of getting it). Immunotherapy can “reawaken” the hepatitis B virus and cause illness that interferes with treatment. Bone marrow biopsy Most bones have a spongy center called marrow. The marrow is where new blood cells are made. It’s uncommon to find cancer cells in the bone marrow of people diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. But if imaging suggests the possibility of lymphoma in the bones, your care team may recommend a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed.
565	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
566	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
567	Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. Cell-free DNA testing Cell-free or circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing uses a sample of blood to look for cancer cells or for pieces of DNA from tumor cells. Although this test is not a recommended standard and its use has not been agreed upon, many providers use it to monitor treatment response and for cancer recurrence. Key points Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health.
568	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
569	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
570	EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide. Inhibiting (blocking) EGFR may keep cancer cells from growing. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is an EGFR inhibitor used to treat CSCC and other cancers. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy stimulates the activity of the immune system, which can improve the body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapies used to treat CSCC and other cancers are known as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) inhibitors. PD-1 inhibitors are a type of immune checkpoint inhibitor. Cemiplimab (Libtayo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are PD-1 inhibitors used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. Uses for systemic therapy Systemic therapy is not often used by itself to treat squamous cell skin cancer. It may be used in combination with radiation therapy to treat CSCC that can’t be removed using surgery. Systemic therapy alone may also be an option if both surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. In this case, immunotherapy with a PD-1 inhibitor is preferred. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used.
571	Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have. Treatment Surgery is recommended to treat squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Surgery for regional CSCC involves excision (removal) of the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Although surgery is preferred, it may not be an option for one or more reasons. In this case, see If surgery is not an option below for information. If surgery is very risky or might not completely remove your cancer, your doctor may suggest immunotherapy with cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo) first. It may shrink the tumor and make surgery less risky. Head and neck tumors Lymph nodes may be removed from one or both sides of the neck during surgery for head and neck tumors. The extent of surgery depends on the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. After surgery, radiation therapy is often given to decrease the chance of the tumor returning. Systemic therapy is sometimes used in addition to radiation therapy after surgery.
572	Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for your child! 2 Testing for ALL General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Bone marrow tests Testing for ALL biomarker and genetic changes B-ALL risk groups Pharmacogenomic testing Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat ALL. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests and what to expect. lymphoblasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of ALL is possible with less than 20 percent lymphoblasts. ALL can be found in bone marrow, blood, and organs such as the testicles or the central nervous system (CNS). In general, to be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are Results from blood and bone marrow tests and imaging studies will be used to determine your child's treatment plan. Tests used to diagnose ALL can be found in Guide Rectal cancer basics 5 The rectum 6 Polyps 6 Key points Rectal cancer is common and treatable.
573	5-FU is given by continuous (constant) infusion over several days. You do not need to stay at a treatment center during this time, however. Before chemotherapy begins, a thin, flexible tube will be inserted into a vein in your upper chest, below the collarbone. This is referred to as a “port.” Using a small wire and often x-ray guidance, the tube is guided to a large vein above the right side of the heart. Some people receive a temporary PICC line instead. A PICC line is a deep IV that stays in the arm for the duration of treatment. The 5-FU is stored in a small, wearable pump connected to the catheter. The pump infuses the medicine into the body very slowly, over several days. The tube, called a central venous catheter, stays in place for the duration of treatment. It allows you to receive chemotherapy with 5-FU from home. The first 5-FU infusion starts when radiation therapy begins and lasts for 4 to 5 days. You will have another 4- to 5-day infusion at the start of week 5 of radiation therapy. The pump will be disconnected and removed between infusions.
574	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
575	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
576	For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it.
577	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
578	h A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States. Types of cervical cancer Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type, followed by adenocarcinoma. Adenosquamous carcinomas are less common. Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC) is a rare and aggressive type of cervical cancer. 2 Testing and staging Biopsy Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging Fertility and pregnancy Other testing and care Staging Cancer care plan Key points Your doctors will make a treatment plan just for you. First, they will need to gather information about the cancer and your general health. This chapter describes testing and other care needed to create your treatment plan. Biopsy Cervical biopsy and pathologic review A cervical biopsy involves removing small samples of tissue from the cervix. It is the most commonly used procedure to diagnose cervical cancer. Samples may be taken from the rounded, bottom part of the cervix (ectocervix) and/or from the endocervical canal. The removed tissue is examined by a specialized doctor called a pathologist. A pathologist is a doctor who specializes in evaluating cells and tissues to diagnose disease.
579	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
580	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
581	The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus. Other risk factors for anal cancer include HIV infection, immunosuppressant use, a history of certain cancers or pre-cancers, certain autoimmune disorders, smoking, and a history of anal sex or sexually transmitted infection. h Recommended testing after diagnosis includes DRE, anoscopy, HIV testing, an screening for cervical cancer. The cancer stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body. Stages I, II, and III are non-metastatic. Stage IV is metastatic. 2 Treatment guide 17 Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) 20 Perianal cancer (stages I – III) 22 Follow-up and surveillance 24 Recurrence 26 Metastatic anal cancer 28 Clinical trials 30 Key points 2 Treatment guide Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. Surgery to remove the anus may be needed for cancer that does not respond to treatment or that returns after treatment. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
582	The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. In addition to the uterus (and cervix), this system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and vagina. Most cervical cancers start in the thin layer of tissue that lines the outer part and inner parts of the cervix. The ectocervix is the outer part of the cervix. It appears rounded and extends into the vagina. The ectocervix can be seen during an examination of the vagina and cervix using a tool called a speculum. It is lined with cells called squamous cells. In the center of the ectocervix is a narrow opening called the external os. During menstruation, the external os opens slightly to allow blood to pass into the vagina. The endocervix (endocervical canal) is the inner part of the cervix that forms a canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. The endocervix is lined with columnar (glandular) cells that make mucus. The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix.
583	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
584	The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix.
585	The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix.
586	Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC). Treatment for small cell NECC is the focus of Part This patient guide does not discuss other types of cervical cancer such as glassy-cell carcinomas, sarcomas, or other tumor types Key points The cervix The cervix is the lower part of the uterus that connects to the vagina. The ectocervix is the outer part that extends into the vagina. The endocervix is the canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Risk factors The risk factor most strongly linked with cervical cancer is long-term infection with HPV, a common sexually transmitted infection. h A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
587	The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix.
588	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
589	The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. For stage 1B1 cancers that do not meet the criteria for cone biopsy, radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B2 Fertility-sparing surgery is not performed often for stage 1B2 cancers. Because most research on fertility-sparing surgery applies to smaller tumors, abdominal surgery is generally preferred. Treatment after surgery If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended.
590	EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide. Inhibiting (blocking) EGFR may keep cancer cells from growing. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is an EGFR inhibitor used to treat CSCC and other cancers. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy stimulates the activity of the immune system, which can improve the body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapies used to treat CSCC and other cancers are known as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) inhibitors. PD-1 inhibitors are a type of immune checkpoint inhibitor. Cemiplimab (Libtayo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are PD-1 inhibitors used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. Uses for systemic therapy Systemic therapy is not often used by itself to treat squamous cell skin cancer. It may be used in combination with radiation therapy to treat CSCC that can’t be removed using surgery. Systemic therapy alone may also be an option if both surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. In this case, immunotherapy with a PD-1 inhibitor is preferred. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used.
591	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
592	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
593	The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia). If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the colon wall, towards the inside of the abdomen. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the colon. 自 Your care team will give you information on: How to prepare for surgery What to expect during and after surgery Recovery Possible short- and long-term side effects of colectomy, including: Leaking from the spot where the colon was reconnected (anastomotic leak) Changes in bowel habits Bowel blocked by scar tissue Organs pushing through tissues or muscles weakened by surgery (hernia) Cancer cells can also break off from the colon tumor and travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer.
594	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
595	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
596	Common symptoms include: Headaches – Headaches are very common and often the first symptom in people with a glioma. Headaches can be worse in the morning, wake you up in the middle of the night, and occur with nausea and vomiting. Seizures – Seizures are also frequent in people with brain tumors. Seizures are often an early sign of a glioma, especially in low-grade gliomas. Fatigue – Fatigue is another common symptom of a glioma. Fatigue can be debilitating, frequent, emotionally overwhelming, and not related to how much sleep you get or how much activity you do. However, physical activity or exercise can sometimes help. Nausea and vomiting – Nausea and vomiting can be caused by the tumor putting increased pressure on the brain. Problems with thinking and speech – Examples include confusion, memory loss, and speech difficulties. Weakness or problems moving – People with a brain tumor may have muscle weakness on one side of the body, or difficulty with walking or balance. Changes in personality or mood – Changes in behavior, mood, and personality can occur in people whose tumors are located in parts of the brain that control mood and personality. Other symptoms also sometimes occur.
597	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
598	It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen. You’ll need to stay in the hospital for at least several days. It may take 2 to 3 months or longer for you to recover. Common side effects and complications of a radical cystectomy include constipation, diarrhea, bleeding, bowel problems, infections, and changes in sexual function. Talk to your Cystectomy Cystectomy is surgery to remove the bladder. A radical cystectomy removes the entire bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs. It’s the most common surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A partial cystectomy removes part of the bladder. It’s rarely used for bladder cancer. urologist and treatment team about the risks, benefits, and side effects of a radical cystectomy. Because a radical cystectomy removes your entire bladder, you’ll need a new way for urine to exit your body. So another procedure, called a urinary diversion, is also done at the same time. To find out about the 3 types of urinary diversion, see the next page. Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer.
599	During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team.
600	They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) and high-grade endometrioid carcinoma are the most common types of ovarian tumors. Less common ovarian cancers can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Treating ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. Gynecologic oncologists and medical oncologists often work together to plan your treatment. 2 Testing for ovarian cancer Abdominal and pelvic exam Imaging tests Biopsy Family history and genetic testing Nutritional and digestive tract health Blood tests Biomarker testing Key points This chapter describes the testing used to learn more about suspected ovarian cancer, including whether surgery is possible. Ovarian cancer can cause changes in the body that you can feel or notice. But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread.
601	Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth. It will also discuss screening and testing options for those who are pregnant or lactating (breastfeeding), and those with breast pain, nipple discharge, changes in the skin, lumps, or other symptoms that require further testing. Transgender individuals Due to lack of evidence, this book does not provide screening guidance for transgender individuals. Transgender individuals should consult with their primary care physician to determine when/whether screening would be appropriate. Those assigned male at birth Those assigned male at birth do not undergo regular mammogram screening. However, if you have breast pain or redness, or a change in the size and shape of one breast, then see your health care provider and read about recommended tests in Chapter Health care providers During regular health checkups and breast cancer screening, you might come in contact with the following health care providers (HCPs): Breast specialist is an expert in breast health and disease. Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed.
602	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
603	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
604	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
605	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
606	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
607	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
608	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
609	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
610	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
611	There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 2 The cancer has grown into, or beyond, the fourth layer of the colon wall. There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in areas outside the colon. Stage 3 The cancer has spread from the colon to nearby lymph nodes or there are tumor deposits. Tumor deposits are small tumors in the fat around the colon. Stage 4 The cancer has spread to areas outside the colon and nearby lymph nodes. Colon cancer spreads most often to the liver and/or lungs. If you can’t have surgery first Having surgery first is not always an option. It may not be possible because of the location of the tumor, or because of other health problems. In this case, systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy) is given first. Systemic therapy may also be given first for advanced cancers, or cancer that has spread to lymph nodes. If this approach is planned, chemotherapy is recommended for pMMR/MSS cancers. Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells.
612	Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-1 and PD-L1 testing Programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) are immune proteins. If either protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses either protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a testing method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA, the genetic material in a person’s cells. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope.
613	Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers.
614	For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a core sample. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. Genetic cancer risk testing Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva from spitting into a cup or a cheek swab. The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your birth parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, blood relatives might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. Biomarker testing A sample from your biopsy will undergo lab tests to look for specific DNA mutations/ alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Biomarker testing is performed on a case-by-case basis and may increase the time it takes for biopsy results. Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing.
615	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
616	A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and help you interpret the results of these tests. Germline testing is recommended for those with prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others High-risk, very-high-risk, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Having any other type of cancer Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Molecular biomarker testing In biomarker testing, a sample from your biopsy is tested to look at its molecular components. This information helps figure out how likely your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. Biomarker testing can be considered for those with localized, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer. Biomarker testing is sometimes called genomic testing, tumor profiling, or molecular tumor testing. The main reason to have a molecular biomarker test is to help assess whether you have lower risk or higher risk prostate cancer.
617	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
618	It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis. Basal cells – Found in the lower part of the epidermis, basal cells constantly divide to form new cells that replace the squamous cells on the skin’s surface. Melanocytes – Melanocytes are cells located in the lower part of the epidermis that produce melanin. Melanin is responsible for our hair, skin, and eye color. It also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. This book is only about basal cell skin cancer. For more information on squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes.
619	What are the risk factors for bladder cancer? A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause bladder cancer. But people with bladder cancer often have one or more of these risk factors: Smoking – Smoking is the greatest risk factor for bladder cancer. It accounts for about half of all cases. Secondhand smoke increases bladder cancer risk, too. Quitting smoking, even after diagnosis, can still be helpful. Age – The risk of bladder cancer increases as you age. Family history – Your risk increases if you or anyone in your family has had bladder cancer. Also, people with an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome have a greater risk of cancer in the urinary tract, including bladder cancer. Chemical exposure – Some chemicals used in dyes, rubber, leather, printing materials, textiles, and paint products have been linked to an increased risk for bladder cancer. How advanced is my bladder cancer? Once bladder cancer is found, it’s important to know how far it has grown or spread.
620	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
621	This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body. Skin lesions Basal cell skin cancer is often found on the face, head, and neck. Here is a basal cell lesion pictured on a person's cheek. Skin basics Did you know that your skin is your body’s largest organ and if you measured it it would stretch to about 20 square feet? Working as a barrier, your skin protects you from bacteria and chemicals and helps control your body temperature. It has 3 layers: Epidermis – The top layer of skin provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis – The middle layer involves connective tissue, blood vessels, oil and sweat glands, nerves, and hair follicles. Hypodermis – The deepest tissue layer is made up of fat and connective tissue. Most skin cancers form in the cells of the epidermis. It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis.
622	This expert can speak with you and your family about testing for syndromes related to colon cancer. To be tested, you must provide a sample of blood or saliva. A pathologist tests the sample for gene mutations that cause these syndromes. It is important to meet with a genetic counselor before having any genetic testing. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose colon cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. Complete blood count Cancer and other health problems can cause low or high blood cell counts. A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help the body to fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. Chemistry profile Also known as a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), this group of tests provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. The level of CEA is often higher than normal in people with colon cancer, especially if the cancer has spread to other organs.
623	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
624	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
625	Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. If you can’t have surgery, there are other good options. Some early cancers are treated with radiation therapy, which is explained in Chapter Other cancers are treated with 2 types of treatments called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is discussed in Chapter Supportive care addresses the challenges of cancer Supportive care has been shown to extend and enhance life for people with lung cancer. Tell your care team about your symptoms and other needs to get the best supportive care for you. More information on supportive care can be found throughout this book. Clinical trials offer hope to all people with lung cancer Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Learn more about clinical trials in Chapter Advocate for yourself You are an important member of your cancer care team. Discuss the recommendations in this book with your team. Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team.
626	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
627	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
628	Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment.
629	The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest. The lungs move important gases in and out of the blood. You breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide (a gas made by cells) from the body. The lungs have sections called lobes. The left lung has 2 lobes and the right lung has 3 lobes. A thin layer of tissue surrounds the lungs called the pleural membrane. This membrane protects the lungs. Two large breathing tubes, called bronchi, connect the windpipe (trachea) to the lungs. There is one tube, called a bronchus, for each lung. Inside the lungs are small tubes (bronchioles) and small air sacs (alveoli). The respiratory system The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood.
630	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
631	It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a handy way to access your test results. Follow these tips for testing: Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get copies of your blood tests, imaging results, and pathology reports. Other providers or specialists may ask you for them. Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your cellphone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of any changes to your list. Chest imaging uses CT or x-ray to see if the cancer has reached the lungs. Bone scan is done when symptoms suggest that the cancer may have spread to any bones. Inherited cancer risk Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk for different cancers.
632	They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses. A research team helps to collect research data and coordinate care if you are in a clinical trial. Clinical trials help bring new therapies to patients and advance the treatment for everyone. Consider asking your care team about access to clinical trials. Your physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing are important. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need What is working and what is not Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Treatment overview Inflammatory breast cancer is treatable. Treatment can be local, systemic, or usually a combination of both. Local therapy focuses on the breast, chest wall, and lymph node area. It includes: Mastectomy (surgery) Radiation therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body.
633	A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein. The radiotracer puts out a small amount of energy that is detected by the machine that takes pictures. Cancer cells appear brighter because they use sugar faster than normal cells. PET is very good at showing small groups of cancer cells. This test may also be useful for showing if ovarian cancer has spread. Chest x-ray A chest -ray can show if cancer has spread to your lungs. It may be ordered with other tests when ovarian cancer is first suspected or found. It may also be used to check treatment results. A chest x-ray is fast and painless and uses small amounts of radiation. Diagnostic laparoscopy If the cancer is advanced, you may have a diagnostic laparoscopy before treatment. The goal is to learn how much cancer is in the abdomen. It helps your doctors to decide whether surgery can be the first treatment, or if chemotherapy is needed first. This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen.
634	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
635	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
636	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
637	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
638	Chapter 3: Bone cancer staging explains how bone cancer is staged and where bone tumors might be found in the body. Chapter 4: Types of treatment gives an overview of the types of different treatment and who might be on your treatment team. Chapter 5: Chondrosarcoma discusses chondrosarcoma treatment. Treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. Chapter 6: Chordoma discusses chordoma treatment. Treatment options include surgery or radiation therapy. Chapter 7: Ewing sarcoma discusses Ewing sarcoma treatment options. Treatment begins with systemic therapy. Chapter 8: Giant cell tumor of bone discusses GCTB treatment options. GCTB is usually not cancer, but needs aggressive treatment to prevent bone damage. Chapter 9: Osteosarcoma discusses osteosarcoma treatment options. Osteosarcoma is the more common type of bone cancer. Treatment is a combination of therapies. Chapter 10: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team.
639	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
640	In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Soft Tissue Sarcoma, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. RCC subtypes Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer. RCC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Tumor histology and other factors are an important part of choosing a treatment plan. Ask your care team about your cancer subtype. Clear cell RCC Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most common subtype. It occurs in about 7 out of 10 people with RCC. Under a microscope, clear cells look very pale or clear. Non-clear cell RCC Non-clear cell RCC is also called nccRCC There are several subtypes. Papillary RCC is the most common subtype of nccRCC (about 1 out of 10 people with RCC). Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different.
641	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
642	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
643	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
644	Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor.
645	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
646	Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer.
647	It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is the focus of this book. Anything that increases your chances of developing liver cancer is called a risk factor. Screening is when tests are done on a regular basis to detect a disease in someone without symptoms. If you have cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B, then you should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program. Screening helps find disease early when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children.
648	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
649	A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. Diagnostic CT Computed tomography, or CT, is like an x-ray but it shows body tissue more clearly. A diagnostic CT uses more radiation than regular CT and adds a contrast agent. Some people refer to this as a CAT scan. A contrast agent is a chemical that highlights body tissues for the scanner. It’s given to you through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some people can’t have contrast due to certain health issues, like allergies or chronic kidney disease. Ask if contrast is safe for you. A diagnostic CT of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis may be needed for 2 reasons: To look for big lymph nodes that may be causing symptoms To assess the extent of the cancer before starting treatment Since a CT scan is often not needed, you should ask your doctor what the reason is to obtain the test. A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel.
650	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
651	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
652	Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well. Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) starts in the mucus-making cells of the inner lining of the esophagus. Adenocarcinomas are often found in the lower esophagus but can occur in the middle esophagus as well. Today, most esophageal cancers in North America and Western Europe are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell carcinoma is more common in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Treatment is based on the type and location of esophageal cancer, in addition to the stage of the tumor (where it is in the body). Some tumors that start in the stomach and cross over into the area between the esophagus and stomach (esophagogastric junction) are treated as esophageal cancers and not as stomach cancers. However, this depends on the exact location of the tumor. Siewert types used as part of cancer staging describe where the tumor is relative to the esophagus and stomach. Barrett esophagus In Barrett esophagus (BE), the squamous cells that line the lower part of the esophagus have changed or been replaced with abnormal cells as a result of chronic reflux.
653	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
654	Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, heart, liver, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Risk is based on: Those with cirrhosis Those without cirrhosis Known risk factors are listed in Guide Cirrhosis Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer.
655	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
656	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
657	It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. A CT scan of your head, neck, and chest, may be one of the tests to look for cancer. In most cases, contrast will be used. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer.
658	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
659	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
660	Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too.
661	You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder. If cancer isn’t found in the urethra or bladder, you’ll need imaging tests to investigate the ureters, kidneys, or other areas. Urine tests for tumor markers Tumors shed cancer cells somewhat like a dog sheds hair. These cancer cells can end up in your urine. Urine tests are now available Cystoscopy and biopsy Cystoscopy is a procedure to look inside your urethra and bladder for any sign of cancer. This procedure uses a cystoscope, a tube with a camera and a light at the end, which is inserted into the urethra and through to the bladder. Cystoscopy may be done at your urologist’s office, a hospital, or a clinic. The procedure takes only a few minutes, doesn’t require general anesthesia, and you can go home afterward. During a cystoscopy You’ll lie on your back on an exam table. You may be positioned with your feet up and your knees apart. After lubricating your urethra (and possibly numbing it with an anesthetic gel), your urologist will slowly insert the cystoscope into the opening of the urethra.
662	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
663	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
664	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
665	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
666	It’s considered a form of cancer. Your blood contains several types of blood cells. One of those is white blood cells. B cells, also called B lymphocytes, are one type of white blood cell. They’re made within the soft, spongy tissue inside most of your bones called bone marrow. When they've matured properly, B cells leave your bone marrow to work in your bloodstream. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells.
667	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
668	How often you should have skin exams depends on whether cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. years. After that, exams can be spaced out to every 6 to 12 months (once or twice a year) for the rest of your life, as recommended by NCCN experts. In addition, imaging tests may be used to monitor some people who have local CSCC. For regional CSCC, physical exams with skin checks should be performed every 2 to 3 months for 1 year, every 2 to 4 months for the second year, every 4 to 6 months for another 3 years, and then every 6 to 12 months for the rest of your life. For patients with regional CSCC, your doctor may want you to have CT scans on a regular basis to look for signs of cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in other parts of your body. The follow-up exam schedules for both local and regional squamous cell skin cancer are shown in Guide About CML 5 What is CML? 7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care?
669	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
670	For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it.
671	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
672	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
673	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
674	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
675	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
676	Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy.
677	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
678	The removed tissue is examined by a specialized doctor called a pathologist. A pathologist is a doctor who specializes in evaluating cells and tissues to diagnose disease. The pathologist looks for abnormal areas, including areas of cancer or pre-cancer. The pathologist also determines the type of cervical cancer, when possible. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy can be both a test and a treatment. It may be used to gather more information about the extent of the cancer after a cervical biopsy. It is also a recommended treatment option for some early cervical cancers. Also known as cervical conization, cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped portion of the cervix. The cone-shaped sample includes tissue from both the ectocervix and the endocervical canal. All of the transformation zone—where the ectocervix and endocervix meet—is removed. Most cervical cancers start in this area. Most commonly, a technique called cold knife conization (CKC) is used. In this method a surgical scalpel is used to remove the tissue. In some cases loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) may be performed instead. In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue.
679	One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy. This is typically only needed for a short time. Another possibility is that a colostomy may be done first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. Lastly, in rare cases, a mesh metal tube called a stent may be placed first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. The stent keeps the colon open, allowing gas and stool to pass. Staging The cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body. Having a general idea of the structure of the colon wall is helpful for understanding how colon cancer is staged. The colon wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with food. This layer is called the mucosa. The next layer is the submucosa. It is made of connective tissue and contains mucus glands, blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia).
680	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
681	A tumor micrometastasis is a very small collection of cancerous cells smaller than 1 mm. It might be written as T1mi. Ipsilateral means on the same side of the body. T1 Tumor is 2 cm or less T2 Tumor is 1 cm to 5 cm T3 Tumor is more than 5 cm T4 Tumor is of any size and has invaded nearby structures such as the chest wall and skin of the breast • T4d Tumor is inflammatory carcinoma (inflammatory breast cancer) Regional lymph node Lymph, a clear fluid containing cells that help fight infections and other diseases, drains through channels into lymphatic vessels. From here, lymph drains into lymph nodes. There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor in the breast. If breast cancer spreads, it often goes first to nearby lymph nodes under the arm. It can also sometimes spread to lymph nodes near the collarbone or near the breastbone. Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer.
682	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
683	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
684	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
685	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
686	This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2). Everyone has BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. When working properly, they are helpful and repair damaged cells. But mutations in these genes increase the risk of developing ovarian, breast, and some other cancers. Another cause of hereditary ovarian cancer is Lynch syndrome. Lynch syndrome is the most common cause of hereditary colon and uterine cancers but can also cause ovarian and other cancers. Ovarian cancer associated with a BRCA mutation or Lynch syndrome usually starts at a younger age than non-hereditary ovarian cancer. Using your age, health history, and family history, your doctor will assess how likely you are to have hereditary ovarian cancer. Genetic testing can tell if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. It is recommended for everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer. If initial treatment works well, BRCA status (whether you have a BRCA mutation) plays an important role in guiding decisions about maintenance therapy.
687	It is common to have another colonoscopy to thoroughly examine the colon and look for other possible areas of cancer. This is called a diagnostic colonoscopy. Mismatch repair testing Mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI) testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with colon cancer. This feature of some colon cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that help guide your treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome, described next. Family health history Your doctor will ask about the health history of your biological (related by blood) family members. Those with a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer are more likely to have this cancer compared to the average person. Most colon cancers occur for unknown reasons.
688	Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the colon wall. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive colon cancer. Cancer that starts in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Colon polyps Polyps are growths on the inner lining of the bowel wall. Some look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. These are called pedunculated polyps. Others are flatter and do not have a stalk. These are called sessile polyps. Often, no further treatment is needed after a polypectomy. In other cases, surgery (resection) of a bigger piece of the colon is needed.
689	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
690	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
691	Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink.
692	Cancer that forms in squamous cells is known as squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the tissues that form the surface of the skin and in other areas of the body. Most colorectal cancers, in contrast, start in glandular cells and are called adenocarcinomas. This difference is important in determining treatment options. Anal squamous cell carcinoma is the focus of this patient guide. Other rare types not covered here include anal adenocarcinoma and anal melanoma. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® are available on rectal cancer and melanoma. The anus The anus is the opening through which feces (also called stool) exit the body. It is located at the very end of the large intestine (bowel). The colon is the first and longest section of the large bowel. The rectum is defined as the last several inches of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. The rectum and anus are located within the pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the body between the hip bones, below the abdomen. Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body.
693	Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored. They may be commonly attributed to hemorrhoids. Although they may be embarrassing to talk about, it is important to be evaluated by a health care professional. Most commonly, people with these symptoms reach out to their primary care physician (PCP), gynecologist, or gastroenterologist. This is an important first step. However, because anal cancer is fairly rare, certain specialists are best qualified to evaluate you. Such specialists include colorectal surgeons and health care providers trained to conduct a test called high-resolution anoscopy (HRA). HRA typically takes place after a digital rectal exam (DRE) is performed. Digital rectal exam The digital rectal exam (DRE) is an important exam for diagnosis, staging, and follow-up. There is nothing high-tech about a DRE. Digit is another word for finger. In a DRE, your doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your anus and rectum. This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas.
694	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
695	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
696	The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. In addition to the uterus (and cervix), this system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and vagina. Most cervical cancers start in the thin layer of tissue that lines the outer part and inner parts of the cervix. The ectocervix is the outer part of the cervix. It appears rounded and extends into the vagina. The ectocervix can be seen during an examination of the vagina and cervix using a tool called a speculum. It is lined with cells called squamous cells. In the center of the ectocervix is a narrow opening called the external os. During menstruation, the external os opens slightly to allow blood to pass into the vagina. The endocervix (endocervical canal) is the inner part of the cervix that forms a canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. The endocervix is lined with columnar (glandular) cells that make mucus. The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix.
697	Chapter 3: Bone cancer staging explains how bone cancer is staged and where bone tumors might be found in the body. Chapter 4: Types of treatment gives an overview of the types of different treatment and who might be on your treatment team. Chapter 5: Chondrosarcoma discusses chondrosarcoma treatment. Treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. Chapter 6: Chordoma discusses chordoma treatment. Treatment options include surgery or radiation therapy. Chapter 7: Ewing sarcoma discusses Ewing sarcoma treatment options. Treatment begins with systemic therapy. Chapter 8: Giant cell tumor of bone discusses GCTB treatment options. GCTB is usually not cancer, but needs aggressive treatment to prevent bone damage. Chapter 9: Osteosarcoma discusses osteosarcoma treatment options. Osteosarcoma is the more common type of bone cancer. Treatment is a combination of therapies. Chapter 10: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team.
698	Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer. As a result, today’s treatments work Small cell lung cancer cells appear small and blue when viewed with a microscope. better than treatments in the past. Also, many people with cancer have more than one treatment option. The two most common types of lung cancer are: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), further divided into: • Adenocarcinoma • Squamous cell carcinoma • Adenosquamous carcinoma • Large cell carcinoma • Sarcomatoid carcinoma Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), further divided into: • Small cell carcinoma • Combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinoma The names of the cancers refer to their appearance under a microscope. When viewed with a microscope, SCLCs appear small and blue. Sometimes lung tumors contain both small cell and non-small cell lung cancer cells. These are called combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinomas and are usually treated like small cell lung cancer. SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book.
699	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
700	Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
701	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
702	Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign cancer has spread to the bone or liver. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells fight infection, and platelets control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures 14 different substances in your blood. It is usually done on the plasma part of your blood. A CMP provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of your liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or that cancer has spread to the liver. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant will be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins.
703	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
704	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
705	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
706	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
707	In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied and less anxious when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! What's in this book? This patient guide describes everything you need to know about living with CLL, including: Tests needed to determine the best treatment for you A period of monitoring, known as "watch and wait" Treatments available for CLL Caring for a rare complication called Richter transformation Supportive care to improve your quality of life 2 Testing for CLL How is CLL confirmed? How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis?
708	What will you do? What side effects are life-long and irreversible even after completing treatment? What medicines may worsen side effects of treatment? Questions to ask your doctors about their experience Are you board certified? If yes, in what area? Do you only treat anal cancer? What else do you treat? Is this treatment a major part of your practice? How many of your patients have had complications? What is the experience of those on your team? I would like to get a second opinion. Is there someone you recommend? How many patients like me (of the same age, gender, race) have you treated? Will you be consulting with experts to discuss my care? Whom will you consult? How many procedures like the one you’re suggesting have you done? How many of your patients have had complications? What were the complications? Questions about chemoradiation Which chemotherapy regimen(s) do you recommend? Are they what NCCN recommends? Will I have intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)? Do you offer IMRT here? If not, can you refer me to someone who does? What will you target? What if I’ve already had pelvic radiation? How many treatment sessions will I require?
709	The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials. Some doctors order biomarker testing early in the course of treatment. Many doctors wait and order it only if the cancer returns or spreads. Testing should be performed on tumor tissue removed during a biopsy or surgery when possible. Otherwise, a sample of blood may be tested instead. Other names for this testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, and comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). Testing for PD-L1 expression is recommended for everyone with recurrent, progressive, or metastatic cervical cancer. If the PD-L1 level exceeds a set cutoff point, the cancer is considered PD-L1-positive. If needed, treatment with certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies may be an option for PD-L1–positive tumors. The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for.
710	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
711	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
712	Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye. While both blue light cystoscopy and narrow-band imaging may potentially detect tumors better than standard white light, they’re relatively new and still in the “testing phase.” More research will show whether they can replace or be used with white light as the standard detection method. Types of imaging include x-rays, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound. CT scan A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a series of cross-sectional images. To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have a CT scan of your abdomen and pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the lower abdomen located between the hip bones; it contains reproductive organs as well as the bladder and rectum. A CT scanner is a large machine that has a tunnel in the middle. During the test, you’ll lie on a table that moves slowly through the tunnel. Pillows or straps may be used to help keep you still during the test.
713	Then a long, thin needle is inserted into the lower part of the spinal column to remove cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is then sent to a lab for testing. More imaging It’s uncommon for primary CNS lymphoma to spread outside of the central nervous system or the eyes. Still, it’s important to have a look at the rest of your body just to be sure. The imaging methods most commonly used for this are positron emission tomography (PET) and/ or computed tomography (CT). PET imaging uses a small amount of a radioactive drug to find cancer cells in the body. After the radioactive drug is injected into a vein, it causes cancer cells to show up as bright spots on PET scans. A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended to look for cancer that has spread to these areas. A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan).
714	Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. Breast MRI If needed, a breast MRI will be used in addition to a mammogram. Contrast should be used. You will be positioned face down in the machine with your arms above your head. Spine and brain MRI An MRI can be used to detect breast cancer that has spread (metastasize) to your spine or brain. For a brain MRI, a device is placed around your head. For a spine MRI, no device is worn. Contrast should be used in an MRI. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body.
715	Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes. Before or during PDEMA, your doctor may consider a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). An SLNB is used to identify the first lymph nodes where cancer might have spread. The surgeon uses a harmless dye and a low-level radioactive solution to find the sentinel nodes. The nodes are then removed and tested for signs of cancer. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA removes the cancer, but other concerning features are noted during surgery, a discussion with different cancer doctors is recommended to determine next steps. Treatment with radiation therapy will be considered. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA does not remove all of the cancer, a discussion between different cancer doctors is recommended to consider next treatment options. If another surgery can be performed, this is often tried first. Otherwise, radiation therapy is recommended. In some cases, systemic therapy is used in addition to radiation. Platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation if you can have it.
716	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
717	Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers. Health history and physical exam To help plan treatment, expect your doctor to ask about your past and current health, including: Illnesses, diseases, and surgeries Medicines that you take (prescription or over-the-counter) Your lifestyle (your diet, activity level, whether you smoke or drink alcohol) Possible symptoms of cervical cancer, such as watery vaginal discharge Your doctor will also do a physical exam of your body, which may include: Checking your vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature) and overall appearance Feeling and/or listening to the organs in your abdomen, including your liver and stomach h A pelvic examination to check the size, position, and appearance of your cervix and uterus It is important to let your doctor know if you have trouble with pelvic exams due to pain, anxiety, or other reasons. Blood tests The following blood tests may be ordered as part of initial testing.
718	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
719	Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread. It is based on how different the tumor cells look compared to normal cells under a microscope. The more different they look, the higher the risk of spreading. Tumor type To diagnose squamous cell skin cancer, you likely had a small sample of tissue removed for testing (a skin biopsy). That tissue sample was then analyzed by a pathologist in order to determine the specific type (and subtype) of cancer. There are certain rare subtypes of squamous cell skin cancer that are more likely to return after treatment. Connective tissue in the tumor Some tumors form fibrous or connective tissue, which is a sign of a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites.
720	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
721	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
722	This means that urine follows the same path out of the body it normally would if you still had your bladder. Because urine leaves the body in the usual way, a stoma and an ostomy bag aren’t needed. A neobladder doesn’t work exactly the same way as a real bladder. You’ll probably need to empty it more often at first, maybe every 1 to 3 hours. Also, urine might come out when you don’t want or expect it to, like during sleep. This is called urinary incontinence. With time and training, you’ll be able to better control the flow of urine from your neobladder. Even so, a neobladder may be difficult to empty completely. Some people have a catheter inserted through their urethra to help empty the neobladder. Continent cutaneous pouch (Indiana pouch) This urinary diversion uses a portion of the large intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. (It’s also called an Indiana pouch because it was developed by surgeons at Indiana University.) A section of the small intestine is used to connect the pouch to a stoma in the wall of the abdomen.
723	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
724	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
725	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
726	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
727	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
728	You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture.
729	Like a CT scanner, an MRI is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. Unlike CT, MRI doesn’t use radiation (x-rays). An MRI also makes much more noise and takes longer than a CT scan. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Imaging To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have an imaging scan of your abdomen and pelvis. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as a cell phone, wristwatch, belt with a metal buckle, or jewelry) into the imaging room. Other types of imaging CT and MRI are commonly used to see how far bladder cancer has spread. Other types of imaging are sometimes used to look for cancer in other parts of the urinary tract or other parts of the body: Urogram uses a contrast solution and either CT or MRI to see how well your entire urinary tract is working.
730	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding.
731	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
732	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
733	Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment.
734	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
735	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
736	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
737	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
738	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
739	This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen. A thin tube with a light and a camera (laparoscope) is used to view the lining of the abdomen and the surface of organs in the abdomen. Tissue samples are taken and tested for cancer cells in a lab. Biopsy To diagnose ovarian cancer, a sample of tissue must be removed from your body for testing. This is called a biopsy. The biopsy is usually done during initial surgery to remove the cancer. But sometimes a biopsy is done to diagnose ovarian cancer before surgery or other planned treatment. This may be the case if the cancer has spread too much to be removed by surgery initially and chemotherapy is needed first. In such cases, a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, core biopsy, or paracentesis may be used. FNA uses a very thin needle to remove a small sample of tissue from the tumor. A core biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle. For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing.
740	Imaging If biopsy results confirm that the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, a computed tomography (CT) scan of lymph nodes near the CSCC is recommended. The goal is to learn about the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. More advanced imaging tests like a PET/CT, that uses special injectable agents to detect cancer, may be needed to see if cancer has spread farther than the lymph nodes, or to help plan treatment. Testing Biopsy If lymph nodes near the CSCC feel swollen or look abnormal on initial imaging tests, the next step is a biopsy. The types of biopsies used for squamous cell skin cancer are fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and core needle biopsy. FNA is also known simply as needle biopsy. Surgical evaluation The results of testing will be considered in order to determine if you are a candidate for surgery to remove the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have.
741	How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites. Cancer cells in lymph or blood vessels If there are cancer cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels outside of the main tumor, it means that the cancer is more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes and other parts of the body. This is known as lymphovascular invasion. Weakened immune system People with a weakened immune system have a higher risk of getting CSCC, and they are at higher risk of cancer returning after treatment. Examples of conditions that weaken the immune system include long-term corticosteroid use, having human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, or having received an organ transplant. Low-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) or shave excision Standard surgical excision Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA If you are not a candidate for surgery, treatment with radiation therapy is recommended if you can have it.
742	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
743	See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean, so keep reading for more details. 7 Adrenal glands 8 Adrenal tumors 8 Adrenocortical carcinoma 9 Signs and symptoms 9 Risk factors 10 Key points Adrenal tumors form in one or both adrenal glands. Adrenal glands produce hormones that affect your body in different ways. This chapter reviews the basics of adrenal tumors. Adrenal glands Your body has 2 adrenal glands. They are located on top of each kidney. Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Each adrenal gland has 2 main parts: Adrenal cortex – This is the outer part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape).
744	Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It’s common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You’ll be informed if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There’s no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments and the costs of routine Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact patient care during the trial. Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance.
745	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
746	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
747	The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors. Radiation exposure Anyone who has had radiation treatment to the head or neck in the past (to treat a childhood cancer, for example) is at increased risk of thyroid cancer. Contact with large amounts of radiation in the environment as a result of a catastrophic event also increases the risk of developing a thyroid cancer. Family history Most thyroid cancers are sporadic, meaning there is no clear cause or risk factor. Only a small number are hereditary, or the result of inherited gene mutations (changes). A personal or family history of thyroid cancer or a related syndrome may increase the risk of thyroid cancer. Syndromes related to thyroid cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Carney complex, Cowden syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Cowden syndrome is also known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). This inherited syndrome can cause follicular thyroid cancer, and other cancers and health problems. Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck.
748	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
749	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
750	This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers. Stage 2 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 2A and 2B dMMR/MSI-H cancers, but may be given for some stage 2C dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for some stage 2 pMMR/MSS cancers. It is most helpful for cancers with a high risk of recurrence (returning after treatment). Your doctor will consider the features and risk factors of the cancer to determine if recurrence is likely. If chemotherapy is planned, recommended regimens include capecitabine and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/leucovorin. These are given for 6 months. FOLFOX and CAPEOX are recommended options for high-risk cancers. FOLFOX is given for 6 months; CAPEOX for 3 months. Side effects Systemic therapy kills both cancer cells and healthy cells. The damage to healthy cells can cause hair loss, cracked skin, mouth sores, and other side effects. Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting.
751	This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed. In stage 1, the tumor has grown into the second or third (muscle) layer of the rectal wall. No further treatment is needed. In stage 2, the tumor has grown through the rectal wall and possibly into nearby tissues or organs. In stage 3, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. More treatment is almost always needed for stage 2 and 3 cancers. Next treatments may include chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or both. More information on chemotherapy is provided next. See page 24 for information on chemoradiation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Chemotherapy regimens used to treat rectal cancer are listed in Guide Any regimen that has “OX” in the name includes oxaliplatin. Oxaliplatin can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy) to your fingers and toes. Symptoms include numbness, cramping, tingling, or pain in these areas. Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
752	Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. Our body has 206 bones. Bones provide structure and support, protect our organs, create blood cells, store chemicals the body needs, and produce hormones. Bone is light, yet strong and can regrow. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for bone cancer provides an overview of tests you might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of biomarker and tumor mutation testing.
753	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
754	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
755	High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals. Other risk factors The health- and lifestyle-related factors listed below can also increase the risk of anal cancer. Some of these factors lead to a higher risk because they weaken the immune system. This can can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection. Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Taking anti-rejection medicines (immunosuppressants) after an organ transplant A history of cervical, vulvar, or vaginal cancer or precancer A history of anal precancer A history of blood cancer such as lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or multiple myeloma Certain autoimmune disorders, such as Crohn’s disease Smoking A history of anal sex A history of sexually transmitted infection (STI) Risk reduction Anal cancer starts as areas of abnormal cells, called lesions, in or near the anus. These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer.
756	It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov/ Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Key points Photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, and topical therapy are treatment options for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions).
757	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
758	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
759	If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a biopsy. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental -ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaws, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
760	It’s the recommended procedure when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. It aims to remove only enough of the tumor to make a diagnosis. A stereotactic biopsy is done by a neurosurgeon in an operating room. First, you’ll be fitted with a frame or several tiny markers around your head to aid the surgery. Next, you’ll be given anesthesia to go to sleep. A small area of your hair will be shaved down to the scalp. The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures and you’ll be able to go home. What an MRI shows An MRI scan highlights primary CNS lymphoma in the brain. People with primary CNS lymphoma may have one or multiple tumors appear on their scan. Image: Stephanie E. Weiss, MD, FASTRO The tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis.
761	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
762	CT scans are good at showing if the cancer has spread outside of the ovaries. They may also show if nearby lymph nodes are bigger than normal. This can be a sign that the cancer has spread. If you can have it, a substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Before the scan you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent will also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, allergic reactions can occur. Tell your team if you've had an allergic reaction to contrast in the past. A CT scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. While you lie on a table that moves through the tunnel, the scanner will rotate an x-ray beam around you to take pictures from many angles. MRI If the ultrasound images are unclear, you may have magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your abdomen and pelvis. An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation.
763	How often you should have skin exams depends on whether cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. years. After that, exams can be spaced out to every 6 to 12 months (once or twice a year) for the rest of your life, as recommended by NCCN experts. In addition, imaging tests may be used to monitor some people who have local CSCC. For regional CSCC, physical exams with skin checks should be performed every 2 to 3 months for 1 year, every 2 to 4 months for the second year, every 4 to 6 months for another 3 years, and then every 6 to 12 months for the rest of your life. For patients with regional CSCC, your doctor may want you to have CT scans on a regular basis to look for signs of cancer in nearby lymph nodes or in other parts of your body. The follow-up exam schedules for both local and regional squamous cell skin cancer are shown in Guide About CML 5 What is CML? 7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care?
764	Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history. Blood tests A complete blood count (CBC), chemistry profile, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test are recommended as part of initial testing. Imaging CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. Fertility and family planning Young adults diagnosed with colon cancer should be counseled about fertility related risks of treatment and options for preserving fertility. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Treatment for non-metastatic cancer 14 Polyps with cancer Invasive cancer Chemotherapy after surgery Surveillance Key points Colon cancer often forms in polyps on the lining of the colon, but can also form as lesions. This chapter explains treatment for cancer that has not spread to areas far from the colon. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the colon wall. The most common type is called an adenoma.
765	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
766	Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink.
767	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
768	Curettage and electrodesiccation C&E or shave excision are recommended treatment options for low-risk, local CSCC. Usually it is considered for early, small CSCC on the surface of the skin. If the tumor ends up being deeper than expected into the skin during the procedure, a standard surgical or shave excision should be performed rather than C&E to remove deep areas of cancerous tissue. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is a recommended treatment option for low-risk, local CSCC. If testing after surgery finds cancer cells in the surrounding tissue removed with the tumor, more treatment is needed. Further treatment options include: Mohs surgery or resection with PDEMA Another surgical excision Radiation therapy (if more surgery cannot be done) Mohs surgery or PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is a recommended treatment option for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes.  See Part 2: Types of treatment for more detailed descriptions of these treatments. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works.
769	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
770	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
771	If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter. Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Primary cutaneous lymphomas Key points Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) starts in B cells, a type of white blood cell called a lymphocyte. These cells make antibodies to fight infections and are an important part of the lymphatic system. CBCL appears as a nodule under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Lymphatic system Lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer. It affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germfighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. Lymph gives cells water and food. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes, help fight infection and disease. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow.
772	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
773	The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells. The radioactive part of the tracer lets your care team see how your cells are using the Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) A very common type of skin cancer Occurs more often in lighter-skinned people Is commonly found in areas of the body exposed to sun, especially the head and neck Rarely spreads to distant areas of the body Can spread in the area where it first forms If not treated can cause severe skin damage and even death Most people (over ) can be cured by completely removing the CSCC substance. This helps them find any usage that is not normal. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan.
774	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
775	Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment.
776	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
777	Another TURBT procedure may be needed about 2 to 6 weeks after the first one. The second TURBT is done to make sure all the tumor is removed. Or it may be done to get a deeper biopsy sample for the pathologist to examine. A treatment called intravesical therapy is often done in combination with TURBT. (More about intravesical therapy to follow.) Bladder removal A procedure called a cystectomy treats bladder cancer by removing the entire bladder. When the word radical is used, it means taking out the bladder as well as nearby lymph nodes. If the disease has spread farther, sometimes other nearby organs also need to be removed, including: Urethra Prostate Seminal vesicles (glands that help make semen) TURBT A transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines and removes tumors on the bladder wall. Part of the vas deferens (a tube that carries sperm away from the testicles) Proximal urethra (part of the urethra that goes through the prostate) Uterus Ovaries Fallopian tubes Part of the vagina Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen.
778	The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum). The liver and nearby organs The gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, and small intestine are found near the liver. Bile Liver cells make bile. Bile is a yellow or green fluid made up of cholesterol, bilirubin, salts such as potassium and sodium, water, and other elements found in the body. It flows into small channels that drain into thin tubes called ducts. These ducts form larger and larger channels that flow into the left and right hepatic ducts. The left and right hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct joins with the cystic duct that connects to the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The common bile duct is joined by the pancreatic duct just before it enters the small intestine. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ found under the liver. It is sometimes described as sac-like because it holds bile from the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food.
779	You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder. If cancer isn’t found in the urethra or bladder, you’ll need imaging tests to investigate the ureters, kidneys, or other areas. Urine tests for tumor markers Tumors shed cancer cells somewhat like a dog sheds hair. These cancer cells can end up in your urine. Urine tests are now available Cystoscopy and biopsy Cystoscopy is a procedure to look inside your urethra and bladder for any sign of cancer. This procedure uses a cystoscope, a tube with a camera and a light at the end, which is inserted into the urethra and through to the bladder. Cystoscopy may be done at your urologist’s office, a hospital, or a clinic. The procedure takes only a few minutes, doesn’t require general anesthesia, and you can go home afterward. During a cystoscopy You’ll lie on your back on an exam table. You may be positioned with your feet up and your knees apart. After lubricating your urethra (and possibly numbing it with an anesthetic gel), your urologist will slowly insert the cystoscope into the opening of the urethra.
780	It is performed using a hollow tool with a magnifying lens at one end, called a cystoscope. The cystoscope is inserted through the urethra and guided into the bladder. Proctoscopy is a procedure to see inside the anus and rectum. It is performed with a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and magnifying lens called a proctoscope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen during cystoscopy or proctoscopy, tissue samples will be removed and tested (biopsied). If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke or vape, it’s important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking and vaping can also increase the risk of lung problems during and after chemotherapy. They also increase your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your care team about resources and programs that can help you quit.
781	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
782	For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid. Samples removed during a biopsy or surgery will be sent to a pathologist, an expert in examining cells using a microscope (called cytology) to confirm the presence of cancer. The pathologist will determine the cancer subtype called tumor histology. A fine-needle aspiration (FNA), fine needle biopsy (FNB), and core needle biopsy (CNB) use needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tumor or lymph node. An ultrasound or CT scan might be used to guide a lymph node biopsy. Biopsy of metastasis Metastasis is the spread of cancer to an area of the body such as lymph nodes or lung. A biopsy of the metastasis may be needed to confirm the presence of cancer. If there is more than one metastasis, each site may be biopsied. The type of biopsy used depends on the location of the suspected metastases and other factors. Biomarker testing Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
783	Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs.
784	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
785	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
786	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
787	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
788	Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). The drugs travel in your bloodstream to treat cancer throughout your body. Chemotherapy may also harm some healthy cells, which is why it can cause harsh side effects. Talk to your care team about any potential side effects from your chemotherapy treatment. Chemotherapy may be given before surgery or sometimes after surgery depending on your type or stage of bladder cancer. Chemotherapy alone (without surgery) is sometimes the main treatment for people who have metastatic bladder cancer. What is dose-dense chemotherapy? The term dose-dense refers to a method of speeding up chemotherapy by shortening the amount of time in between treatments (doses). The most common systemic chemotherapy used to treat bladder cancer is a combination of medicines known as dose-dense methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (or ddMVAC). A commonly used chemotherapy for bladder cancer is cisplatin, which contains the metal platinum. Platinum-based chemotherapy medicines can be effective against bladder cancer but can also damage the kidneys.
789	The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells. The radioactive part of the tracer lets your care team see how your cells are using the Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) A very common type of skin cancer Occurs more often in lighter-skinned people Is commonly found in areas of the body exposed to sun, especially the head and neck Rarely spreads to distant areas of the body Can spread in the area where it first forms If not treated can cause severe skin damage and even death Most people (over ) can be cured by completely removing the CSCC substance. This helps them find any usage that is not normal. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan.
790	Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place.
791	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
792	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
793	Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures. It is a type of ultrasound. For this test, small patches will be placed on your chest to track your heartbeat. Next, a wand with gel on its tip will be slid across part of your bare chest. A picture of your beating heart will be seen on a screen. The pictures will be recorded for future viewing. An echocardiogram shows the structure (valves and muscle thickness) and function of your heart (or ejection fraction). Ejection fraction is the amount of blood pumped out of the left side of your heart every time it beats. If the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart is lower than normal, this indicates decreased heart function. 66 It is important to understand what you are going through. If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said.
794	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
795	Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-1 and PD-L1 testing Programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) are immune proteins. If either protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses either protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a testing method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA, the genetic material in a person’s cells. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope.
796	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
797	See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean, so keep reading for more details. 7 Adrenal glands 8 Adrenal tumors 8 Adrenocortical carcinoma 9 Signs and symptoms 9 Risk factors 10 Key points Adrenal tumors form in one or both adrenal glands. Adrenal glands produce hormones that affect your body in different ways. This chapter reviews the basics of adrenal tumors. Adrenal glands Your body has 2 adrenal glands. They are located on top of each kidney. Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Each adrenal gland has 2 main parts: Adrenal cortex – This is the outer part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape).
798	Lumbar puncture A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing. CSF is a liquid that flows in and around the hollow areas in the brain and spinal cord. This fluid protects and nourishes the central nervous system. Testing the CSF can help confirm a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma. Testing also provides other helpful information needed for planning treatment. A lumbar puncture is done only if it can be performed safely and it won’t delay treatment. If cancer cells are found in the spinal fluid, or if you’re having symptoms, another MRI may be needed to find out if there are any lesions in the spine. Lumbar puncture Cancer cells in the spinal fluid may or may not cause symptoms. A lumbar puncture is used to learn whether cancer has spread to the spinal cord. First, the lower back is numbed. Then a long, thin needle is inserted into the lower part of the spinal column to remove cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is then sent to a lab for testing.
799	Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since some parts of the mouth and throat are not easy to see when you open your mouth, a health care provider might feel (palpate) your oral cavity and use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope to look at these areas. Dental exam It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments.
800	Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since some parts of the mouth and throat are not easy to see when you open your mouth, a health care provider might feel (palpate) your oral cavity and use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope to look at these areas. Dental exam It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments.
801	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
802	Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since some parts of the mouth and throat are not easy to see when you open your mouth, a health care provider might feel (palpate) your oral cavity and use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope to look at these areas. Dental exam It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments.
803	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
804	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
805	All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA. Mohs surgery can be done in a medical office or surgical suite and should be done by a dermatologic (skin) surgeon who has special training and experience in this procedure. Most patients remain awake during the procedure. After the area is numbed, the visible tumor is first removed using a scalpel. Next, a thin layer of surrounding tissue is removed from under and around the wound. The edges and underside of this tissue are evaluated by the Mohs surgeon using a microscope while you wait. If cancer cells are seen by the surgeon, another thin layer of tissue is removed only from the area of the wound where the cancer was seen. When a removed layer shows no cancer cells at its edges, the procedure is over. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is another option for treating squamous cell skin cancer. A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake.
806	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
807	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
808	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
809	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
810	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
811	Treatment may be able to put primary CNS lymphoma into remission. Remission means there are no symptoms or signs of cancer. Remission may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, primary CNS lymphoma often comes back (relapses) in the brain, spinal cord, or the eye. It’s true that primary CNS lymphoma is fatal for some patients. Anyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma has a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. In the past few years, improved detection methods have shortened the time to diagnosis and led to better outcomes, even in people with weakened immune systems. Therapies specifically designed to treat primary CNS lymphoma are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease. What’s next? This chapter provides only a brief overview of primary CNS lymphoma. The next chapters explain: Tests needed to diagnose the disease Different treatment options and what they do Which treatment options are right for you What happens after treatment Thoughts on next steps 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different.
812	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
813	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
814	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
815	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
816	Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children. So, do not limit yourself and do not hold back from doing something because you are scared or you are worried about the 'what ifs.' If you live your life with those limitations, you’ll have no life at all.” 2 Diagnosing liver cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Performance status Key points Liver cancer is usually confirmed with imaging tests. More tests will be done to plan treatment. Sometimes, a biopsy is needed to confirm cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results.
817	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
818	A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. Diagnostic CT Computed tomography, or CT, is like an x-ray but it shows body tissue more clearly. A diagnostic CT uses more radiation than regular CT and adds a contrast agent. Some people refer to this as a CAT scan. A contrast agent is a chemical that highlights body tissues for the scanner. It’s given to you through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some people can’t have contrast due to certain health issues, like allergies or chronic kidney disease. Ask if contrast is safe for you. A diagnostic CT of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis may be needed for 2 reasons: To look for big lymph nodes that may be causing symptoms To assess the extent of the cancer before starting treatment Since a CT scan is often not needed, you should ask your doctor what the reason is to obtain the test. A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel.
819	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
820	A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein. The radiotracer puts out a small amount of energy that is detected by the machine that takes pictures. Cancer cells appear brighter because they use sugar faster than normal cells. PET is very good at showing small groups of cancer cells. This test may also be useful for showing if ovarian cancer has spread. Chest x-ray A chest -ray can show if cancer has spread to your lungs. It may be ordered with other tests when ovarian cancer is first suspected or found. It may also be used to check treatment results. A chest x-ray is fast and painless and uses small amounts of radiation. Diagnostic laparoscopy If the cancer is advanced, you may have a diagnostic laparoscopy before treatment. The goal is to learn how much cancer is in the abdomen. It helps your doctors to decide whether surgery can be the first treatment, or if chemotherapy is needed first. This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen.
821	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
822	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
823	Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system.
824	Early-stage prostate cancer hasn’t spread outside the prostate gland. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spread is called metastasis. Not everyone diagnosed with prostate cancer needs treatment. 66 Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation.” 2 Tests for prostate cancer About testing Common prostate tests General health tests Diagnostic tests What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed, testing is necessary to find out if you have prostate cancer and whether it’s early-stage or advanced-stage cancer. Testing also helps your providers plan the right treatment. About testing Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing.
825	Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion. This allows partly digested food and other stomach contents to pass from the stomach to the small intestine. The esophagus joins the stomach just below the diaphragm at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). The diaphragm is the thin breathing muscle below the lungs and heart that separates the chest from the abdomen. The EGJ might be referred to as the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include the cardia, the fundus, the body, the antrum, and the pylorus. The stomach is part of the digestive system. Many lymph nodes can be found along the lesser and greater curvatures of the stomach. Stomach wall The stomach is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are layers of muscle and connective tissue. The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food.
826	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
827	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
828	Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss. About kidney cancer The kidneys How the kidneys work Kidney cancer RCC subtypes How kidney cancer spreads Key points The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. The kidneys make hormones and filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. This chapter will discuss the kidneys and provide an overview of kidney cancer. The kidneys The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. Each kidney is about the size of an adult’s fist. The kidney is covered by a thin layer of tissue, like the skin of an apple. This layer of tissue is called the renal capsule. Renal refers to the kidney. The kidneys are part of the urinary system. The urinary system is a group of organs that remove waste from the body in the form of urine (or pee). This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure.
829	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
830	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
831	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
832	Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared with white males. Prostate cancer is diagnosed less often in Hispanic and Asian males than in white and Black males. Several things may contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Specialists are researching each of these areas. In light of these issues, Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier than what’s recommended for other males. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive is also used to describe therapy that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to prevent prostate cancer or to cause prostate cancer. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer.
833	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
834	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
835	Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red. Or, if there isn’t enough blood to be visible, your urine may look normal. But your clinical team can still detect blood by looking at a sample of the urine under a microscope. Blood in the urine can be caused by many other things besides bladder cancer. The most common cause is an infection in the urinary tract. So anyone with blood in their urine should see a health care provider to get their urine tested. Other symptoms of bladder cancer include: Frequent urination Urgency to urinate Painful urination Back pain Not every person with bladder cancer will have all these symptoms. Some people will have no symptoms. A person with one or more of these symptoms should visit a doctor or other health care provider who can recommend different tests. These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean?
836	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
837	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
838	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
839	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
840	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
841	Share this information with your care team and update your team with any changes to your family history. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems). You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has full and upto-date information about how you’re doing. Diagnostic tests Diagnostic tests are used to confirm you have cancer. They’re also used to find out if the cancer is localized or advanced. Diagnostic tests can help plan treatment after you’ve been diagnosed and can detect whether the cancer is still growing or spreading after treatment. Diagnostic tests include imaging scans, biopsies, and genetic tests. Imaging tests An imaging test takes pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal cancer, including its size, location, and other features such as the size of the prostate itself.
842	How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may be a sign of disease. Gliomas cause symptoms when they put pressure on the brain or invade brain tissue. Some people have many symptoms while others don’t have any. Common symptoms of gliomas include: Unusual or frequent headaches Seizures Changes in personality or mood Nausea and vomiting Difficulty speaking or swallowing Muscle weakness Difficulty with walking, balance, or coordination Symptoms provide clues that something is wrong. But they don’t provide enough information to identify a specific illness. Different tests, physical exams, and surgical procedures are required to diagnose a glioma. If these tests show that you have a glioma, your care team will discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain tumors. Diagnosis vs. prognosis What’s the difference between your diagnosis and your prognosis? These two words sound alike but they’re very different. Diagnosis: The identification of an illness based on tests. The diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis: The likely course and outcome of a disease. The prognosis predicts how your disease will turn out.
843	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
844	Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks. Side effects The side effects of brachytherapy are similar to those of EBRT and include: h Skin irritation near treatment area Tiredness (fatigue) Soreness in your pelvic area Difficulty urinating or painful urination Softer bowel movements or diarrhea Increased vaginal discharge Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Most systemic therapies are given intravenously. This means they are slowly infused into your bloodstream through a vein. Infusions are often given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Chemotherapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. It stops the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Cisplatin is generally preferred for platinumbased chemotherapy.
845	How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may be a sign of disease. Gliomas cause symptoms when they put pressure on the brain or invade brain tissue. Some people have many symptoms while others don’t have any. Common symptoms of gliomas include: Unusual or frequent headaches Seizures Changes in personality or mood Nausea and vomiting Difficulty speaking or swallowing Muscle weakness Difficulty with walking, balance, or coordination Symptoms provide clues that something is wrong. But they don’t provide enough information to identify a specific illness. Different tests, physical exams, and surgical procedures are required to diagnose a glioma. If these tests show that you have a glioma, your care team will discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain tumors. Diagnosis vs. prognosis What’s the difference between your diagnosis and your prognosis? These two words sound alike but they’re very different. Diagnosis: The identification of an illness based on tests. The diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis: The likely course and outcome of a disease. The prognosis predicts how your disease will turn out.
846	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
847	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
848	The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum).
849	It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in food, breaks it down, absorbs the nutrients, and removes waste from the body. intestine at a time, the stomach also serves as a temporary holding chamber. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. There is not much activity where the stomach connects to the esophagus and small intestine. However, the main body of the stomach is very active during digestion. The stomach The stomach is a muscular, hollow organ located between the esophagus and the small intestine. It secretes enzymes and acid that convert what you eat and drink into a liquid called chyme. When empty, your stomach is about 10 to 12 inches in size. The stomach is part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach.
850	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
851	The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach. After being broken down into a liquid, food enters the small intestine. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. Parts of the esophagus Esophagus wall The esophagus wall contains 4 layers: Mucosa – inner membrane that is in contact with food. It has 3 parts: Epithelium – innermost lining and is normally made up of flat, thin cells called squamous cells Lamina propria – thin layer of connective tissue under the epithelium Muscularis mucosa - very thin layer of muscle under the lamina propria Submucosa – layer of connective tissue just below the mucosa that contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. In some parts of the esophagus, this layer also includes glands that secrete mucus. Muscularis propria – thick layer of muscle under the submucosa. It contracts in a coordinated way to push food down the esophagus from the throat to the stomach (peristalsis). Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle.
852	So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. Don’t fear the digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. Although it can be uncomfortable, it’s over in less than a minute. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is a procedure in which your doctor inserts a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. General health tests Health history Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
853	See page 17 for treatment information. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 22 for next steps. Follow-up and surveillance After finishing treatment for anal cancer, you will have testing to find early signs that cancer may have returned. This is called surveillance. Surveillance for the return of anal canal cancer and perianal cancer is the same. A follow-up physical exam with digital rectal examination (DRE) and anoscopy is recommended 8 to 12 weeks after completing chemoradiation to check the results of treatment. Your doctor may also order imaging tests. Depending on the results, the cancer is assigned to 1 of the following categories: Complete remission – there are no signs of cancer in the body Persistent disease – cancer remains in the body but has not grown or spread Progressive disease – the cancer has grown or spread Complete remission If initial follow-up testing finds no signs of cancer, recommended surveillance going forward is described below. Digital rectal exams DREs are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment. Lymph node exams Inguinal lymph node exams are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment.
854	This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA. Testing after diagnosis After a biopsy confirms anal squamous cell carcinoma, more testing is needed to plan treatment. Digital rectal exams are repeated. This section describes additional recommended testing after diagnosis. Lymph node exam There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes in the body. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Certain areas of the body contain more lymph nodes than others. The groin (where the thigh meets the abdomen) is one such area. Lymph nodes in the groin are called the inguinal lymph nodes. If left untreated, anal cancer cells can travel through lymphatics or blood to these groin lymph nodes or other lymph nodes in the pelvis, and then to other areas of the body. Lymph nodes cannot usually be seen or felt in the early stages of cancer, but may become enlarged as cancer progresses. Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation.
855	It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected.
856	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
857	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
858	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
859	The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. For a transabdominal ultrasound, a gel will be spread on your abdomen and pelvis. The gel helps to make the pictures clearer. Your doctor will place the probe on your skin and guide it back and forth in the gel. For a transvaginal ultrasound, your doctor will insert the probe into your vagina. This may help the doctor see your ovaries more clearly. Transvaginal ultrasound Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of the inside of the body. For a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe is inserted into the vagina. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. CT Imaging to look for ovarian cancer may include computed tomography (CT) scans of your abdomen, pelvis, and chest. CT scans are good at showing if the cancer has spread outside of the ovaries. They may also show if nearby lymph nodes are bigger than normal.
860	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
861	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
862	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
863	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
864	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core.
865	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core.
866	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
867	Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms.
868	See Recurrence on the next page for more information. Before proceeding with surgery, your doctor may recommend trying immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor. In some anal cancer patients, immunotherapy worked well enough that surgery was not needed. However, there is not much research available on this treatment approach. Talk to your doctor about the possible benefits and risks of delaying surgery to try immunotherapy. Accept NO SHAME - anal cancer is like any other and can happen to anyone. – Janet Anal cancer survivor Recurrence Recurrence is the return of cancer after a cancer-free period. Treatment depends on whether the cancer returns to the anus, to lymph nodes near the anus, or to distant areas such as the liver or lungs. See page 26 for information on the treatment of metastatic anal cancer. If cancer returns to the anus If cancer returns to the anal area, surgery to remove the anus is recommended. This type of surgery is called abdominoperineal resection (APR). APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer.
869	Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as local/regional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on metastatic breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk.
870	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
871	Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN2 or cMIn throat cancer, the clinical (before surgery) stage is based on imaging results. These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Surgery is needed to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery.
872	The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Depth and size of the main (primary) tumor and if the tumor has grown into nearby tissue (tumor extension). N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) -– If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes near the mouth. Moderately or very advanced disease – This includes cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the bones and muscles of the jaw, sinuses, or skin. It might include cancer in the base of the skull or carotid artery. Metastatic – This is cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. Your preferences about treatment are always important.
873	Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches.
874	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
875	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
876	In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma. Stool exits the body through the stoma and enters a bag attached to the skin. This is typically only needed for a short time. For colon cancer surgery, the colostomy can often be reversed with another operation. Colostomy is also known as diversion because it diverts (redirects) the flow of stool. Colostomy If the two healthy ends of the remaining colon cannot be safely reconnected after the cancer is removed, a colostomy may be performed. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening in your abdomen that allows stool to pass through. For colon cancer surgery, it is rare for a colostomy not to be reversed with another operation. Bowel blockage In rare cases, a tumor may grow so large that it blocks the flow of stool. There are several ways to deal with a blockage. One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy.
877	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
878	Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor.
879	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
880	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
881	Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers.
882	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
883	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
884	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
885	Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system.
886	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
887	Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL.
888	However, not everyone has elevated levels of these markers and tumor markers alone are not a reliable method of detecting breast cancer. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). TMB-H can be used to help predict response to cancer treatment using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing A sample of your tumor or blood may be used to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Certain mutations such as PIK3CA can be targeted with specific therapies. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR).
889	The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body. Stage 4A – There are cancer cells in the fluid around the lungs. This is called a malignant pleural effusion. • Stage 4B – Cancer has spread to the inside of the liver or spleen, to distant lymph nodes, or to other organs outside the abdomen. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of medicine(s) to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. When given before surgery, chemotherapy is called neoadjuvant therapy. When given after surgery, it is called primary or adjuvant chemotherapy. Platinum-based chemotherapy is recommended for ovarian cancer. These medicines contain the metal platinum. Carboplatin, cisplatin, and oxaliplatin are examples. One of these is often given with a different type of chemotherapy called a taxane. Paclitaxel and docetaxel are taxanes. Your options for chemotherapy will depend on your age and overall health. Your provider will also consider your risk for nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy. This common side effect of paclitaxel causes pain, tingling, and numbness, often in the hands and feet.
890	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
891	Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin. Excision biopsy During an excision biopsy, all or part of the lesion is removed. This biopsy can be done in Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, and genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used.
892	A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy. A radiation oncologist is an expert in the use of radiation therapy to treat cancer. Your primary care physician (PCP) and gynecologist can also be a part of your team. These health care providers can help you express your feelings about your care to the team. Treatment of other health problems may be improved if they are aware of and involved in your cancer care. In addition to doctors, you may receive care from nurses, social workers, and other health experts. Ask to have the names and contact information of your health care providers included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment There isn't a treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one treatment option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your doctors agree on should be described in the treatment plan. All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome.
893	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
894	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
895	A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed.
896	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
897	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
898	The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus. Other risk factors for anal cancer include HIV infection, immunosuppressant use, a history of certain cancers or pre-cancers, certain autoimmune disorders, smoking, and a history of anal sex or sexually transmitted infection. h Recommended testing after diagnosis includes DRE, anoscopy, HIV testing, an screening for cervical cancer. The cancer stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body. Stages I, II, and III are non-metastatic. Stage IV is metastatic. 2 Treatment guide 17 Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) 20 Perianal cancer (stages I – III) 22 Follow-up and surveillance 24 Recurrence 26 Metastatic anal cancer 28 Clinical trials 30 Key points 2 Treatment guide Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. Surgery to remove the anus may be needed for cancer that does not respond to treatment or that returns after treatment. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
899	Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins. This helps your immune system locate and then destroy the cancer cells. Rituximab is given through an IV infusion. Side effects of immunotherapy Rituximab and other immunotherapies may cause drowsiness, fatigue, constipation, joint pain, loss of appetite, low blood cell counts, serious blood clots, and rashes. Keep track of your symptoms and side effects Think about ways to keep track of your symptoms and side effects when they happen. You can make notes in a weekly diary, on a calendar, or in a smartphone app. Or create your own way to record the symptoms or side effects you experience. Some things to track include: Each treatment and any side effects it caused How long the side effect lasted How the side effect affected your quality of life If you’re given a treatment for a side effect, note how well the treatment worked Show this information to your treatment team at each visit. Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing.
900	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
901	Prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Pathologic stage applies to those who have undergone surgery as the initial treatment for breast cancer. Breast cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN2 or cM Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might look like ypT Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas?
902	Surgery is an option for more people now than in the past due to medical advances. Other types of cancer treatment are used with Pancreatic cancer stages Very rarely, pancreatic cancer is only in the duct (stage 0) or only in the pancreas (stage 1 or some stage 2). Stage 2 and stage 3 also include cancers that have spread to beanshaped structures called lymph nodes (shown). Other stage 3 cancers have grown to nearby arteries, such as the celiac axis. Most often, pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas, which is stage surgery to improve results. Ongoing research is assessing whether it is better to receive these other treatments before or after surgery. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. For most people with pancreatic cancer, surgery is not the best treatment. Instead, drug treatment is most often used to control cancer’s growth and reduce symptoms. Research has compared current cancer drugs to identify the best ones. In recent years, drug regimens based on cancer markers have been used to improve results. Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer.
903	It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers.
904	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
905	See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean, so keep reading for more details. 7 Adrenal glands 8 Adrenal tumors 8 Adrenocortical carcinoma 9 Signs and symptoms 9 Risk factors 10 Key points Adrenal tumors form in one or both adrenal glands. Adrenal glands produce hormones that affect your body in different ways. This chapter reviews the basics of adrenal tumors. Adrenal glands Your body has 2 adrenal glands. They are located on top of each kidney. Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Each adrenal gland has 2 main parts: Adrenal cortex – This is the outer part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape).
906	During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team.
907	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
908	There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. If you are looking for more information on breast cancer, read NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Ductal Carcinoma In Situ, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Invasive, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Metastatic, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines Early detection Breast cancer screening aims to find breast cancer early. Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth.
909	Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Lymph fluid drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Lymphatic fluid is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). Ductal carcinoma in situ Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or intraductal carcinoma is found in the cells that line the ducts. Ducts are thin tubes that carry milk in the breast. DCIS is noninvasive cancer. Noninvasive means the cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread anywhere else. DCIS is a preinvasive disease. DCIS is treated to prevent invasive breast cancer, a more advanced form of cancer.
910	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
911	An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms, because you may need special testing: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation What causes prostate cancer? Many people who develop prostate cancer wonder where it came from and how they got it. Cancer researchers don’t know exactly what causes prostate cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). The fact is, everyone with a prostate has a risk of getting prostate cancer. But several factors are linked to a higher risk of prostate cancer. These are called risk factors. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting cancer.
912	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
913	The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum).
914	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
915	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
916	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
917	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment.
918	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
919	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
920	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
921	For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor.
922	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
923	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
924	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
925	h A sample of your tumor or blood may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. Cancer caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better. NCCN.org/patients/feedback 3 Nasopharyngeal cancer staging 20 How NPC is staged 22 TNM scores 23 NPC stages 25 Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. This chapter explains nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) stages. The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage.
926	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
927	Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis may sometimes be stressful and may cause distress. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. More information on distress can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan.
928	Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Therefore, becoming pregnant or having one's partner become pregnant during treatment should be avoided. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood.
929	The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. In addition to the uterus (and cervix), this system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and vagina. Most cervical cancers start in the thin layer of tissue that lines the outer part and inner parts of the cervix. The ectocervix is the outer part of the cervix. It appears rounded and extends into the vagina. The ectocervix can be seen during an examination of the vagina and cervix using a tool called a speculum. It is lined with cells called squamous cells. In the center of the ectocervix is a narrow opening called the external os. During menstruation, the external os opens slightly to allow blood to pass into the vagina. The endocervix (endocervical canal) is the inner part of the cervix that forms a canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. The endocervix is lined with columnar (glandular) cells that make mucus. The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix.
930	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
931	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
932	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
933	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
934	You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others. Ask for the names and contact information of your care providers to be included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment may be improved if your primary care provider is involved. They can help manage other health conditions that may be affected by your cancer treatment. Your treatment plan There isn't one treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your care team agree on should be noted in the treatment plan, along with possible side effects. Keep in mind that your plan may change. Testing may provide new information. Your feelings about treatment may change. Side effects or other health conditions may prompt a change of plan. Key points The ovaries are a pair of grapesized organs in the pelvis. They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium.
935	PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer. However, high PSA levels can vary by age, race, and other factors: Age – PSA level tends to increase with age. For people in their 40s, a PSA level above 5 ng/mL is very suspicious for disease. For those in their 60s, 5 ng/mL or higher is suspicious. A PSA level of 10 ng/mL or higher is a danger sign at any age. Race – Normal PSA levels tend to be higher in Black males than in white males—about 1 point higher on average among males of the same age. Researchers don’t know the reason for this difference, but they’re investigating it. Enlarged prostate – The larger the prostate, the more PSA it can make. Other health issues besides cancer can also cause an enlarged prostate. h Sex and exercise – PSA may increase after ejaculation or vigorous exercise. Your doctor may recommend avoiding sex and exercise for 2 or 3 days before a PSA test. This short break allows PSA to return to its usual level.
936	Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures. It is a type of ultrasound. For this test, small patches will be placed on your chest to track your heartbeat. Next, a wand with gel on its tip will be slid across part of your bare chest. A picture of your beating heart will be seen on a screen. The pictures will be recorded for future viewing. An echocardiogram shows the structure (valves and muscle thickness) and function of your heart (or ejection fraction). Ejection fraction is the amount of blood pumped out of the left side of your heart every time it beats. If the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart is lower than normal, this indicates decreased heart function. 66 It is important to understand what you are going through. If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said.
937	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
938	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
939	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
940	Precancer There are abnormal cells on the surface of the anal canal or perianal region. These lesions may develop into cancer. Names for anal precancer include stage 0 anal cancer, anal dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, high-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), and highgrade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL). Treatment may involve close monitoring, electrocautery by an HRA provider, or surgical removal. Stage I In stage I anal cancer, the tumor is 2 cm or smaller. Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage I anal cancer is described as T1, N0, M Stage II Stage II anal cancer is divided into 2 substages, depending on the size of the tumor. Anal tumors larger than 2 cm but not larger than 5 cm are stage IIA. This stage is described as T2, N0, MAnal tumors larger than 5 cm are stage IIB. This stage is described as T3, N0, M Stage II anal cancers have not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage III Stage III anal cancer is divided into 3 substages. There may be cancer in nearby lymph nodes.
941	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
942	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
943	Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer. They include: An ultrasound (US) An alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test An ultrasound is a test that uses sound waves to take pictures of the inside of the body. A blood test checks for the protein AFP. An elevated or rising AFP might be a sign of primary liver cancer. This is cancer that starts in the liver. Follow-up steps after a screening ultrasound may include: If AFP is elevated or an ultrasound finds nodules that are 10 millimeters (mm) or larger, then you will have more tests. Nodules are small, round areas of tissue. Not all nodules are cancer. h If an ultrasound finds nodules that are smaller than , repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 3 to 6 months. If an ultrasound is negative, repeat the ultrasound and AFP in 6 months. Key points The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer.
944	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
945	If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made.
946	A history of smoking Having given birth more than once (called “high parity” or multiparity) Oral contraceptive (birth control) use Being sexually active at an early age A high number of sexual partners A history of sexually transmitted infection Certain autoimmune diseases A weakened immune system due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, for example Types of cervical cancer Most cervical cancers start in the ectocervix. The ectocervix is lined with squamous cells. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called a squamous cell carcinoma. About 2 out of 10 cervical cancers form in the endocervical canal. The endocervix is lined with cells that make mucus. These cells are referred to as glandular, gland-like, secretory, or columnar cells. Cancers that form in glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. Less commonly, the cancer may contain both squamous and adenocarcinoma cells. These cancers are referred to as adenosquamous carcinomas. They are sometimes called “mixed” tumors. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
947	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
948	The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. In addition to the uterus (and cervix), this system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and vagina. Most cervical cancers start in the thin layer of tissue that lines the outer part and inner parts of the cervix. The ectocervix is the outer part of the cervix. It appears rounded and extends into the vagina. The ectocervix can be seen during an examination of the vagina and cervix using a tool called a speculum. It is lined with cells called squamous cells. In the center of the ectocervix is a narrow opening called the external os. During menstruation, the external os opens slightly to allow blood to pass into the vagina. The endocervix (endocervical canal) is the inner part of the cervix that forms a canal between the vagina and the body of the uterus. The endocervix is lined with columnar (glandular) cells that make mucus. The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix.
949	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
950	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
951	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
952	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
953	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
954	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
955	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
956	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
957	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
958	You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver. This may be the case if you can't have the contrast agent used for a CT scan. MRI An MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. A gel may be inserted into the rectum before MRI imaging. A light coil device or blanket will be placed on top of you. It sends and receives radio waves to record the images. The device covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. You may feel a bit warm during the scan. Endorectal ultrasound While a pelvic MRI is preferred for imaging rectal cancer, an endorectal ultrasound (EUS) is sometimes performed instead. Using sound waves, this test can also show the extent of cancer in the pelvis. A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen.
959	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
960	But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options. Endoscopic submucosal dissection If testing finds that the tumor hasn’t grown beyond the second (muscle) layer of the rectal wall, it is a T1 tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a recommended option for all T1 tumors. This minimally invasive procedure removes small rectal cancers in one piece, often curing them. Another name for this procedure is endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). First, an endoscope is used to locate the tumor in the rectal wall. A tool is guided through the scope to inject fluid between the tumor and the layer of muscle beneath it. This helps lift and separate the tumor, making it easier to cut off. Most people don’t need more treatment. Surveillance after ESD Checking for recurrence is recommended for at least 5 years after ESD. During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD.
961	But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options. Endoscopic submucosal dissection If testing finds that the tumor hasn’t grown beyond the second (muscle) layer of the rectal wall, it is a T1 tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a recommended option for all T1 tumors. This minimally invasive procedure removes small rectal cancers in one piece, often curing them. Another name for this procedure is endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). First, an endoscope is used to locate the tumor in the rectal wall. A tool is guided through the scope to inject fluid between the tumor and the layer of muscle beneath it. This helps lift and separate the tumor, making it easier to cut off. Most people don’t need more treatment. Surveillance after ESD Checking for recurrence is recommended for at least 5 years after ESD. During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD.
962	Use the questions in the back of the book to discuss and decide with your care team which care options are right for you. Choose a multidisciplinary team. It takes a team of experts to treat pancreatic cancer. Read this book to learn which care providers are part of the team. You choose your team by deciding where to get care. Getting a second opinion on treatment may help you decide which treatment to receive. Be an active team member. When discussing treatment, share your goals with your team. Ask questions when you don’t understand. Supportive care is part of cancer care, so tell your team about symptoms and other challenges you have. Key parts of supportive care are explained in this book. 2 Tests for pancreatic cancer Multidisciplinary consult Imaging Endoscopic tests Biopsy Blood tests Genetic tests for inherited mutations Biomarker tests for profiling Key points A series of tests is needed to identify pancreatic cancer and make a treatment plan. Imaging is key to staging the cancer and deciding if surgery is a treatment option. Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment.
963	Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed. This depends on the following factors: The size and shape of the polyp The polypectomy results The results of testing the removed tissue Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your provider will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Sessile polyps are more likely to return after treatment. Imaging with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for these polyps to help guide decisions about surgery. Early rectal cancer If cancer that formed in a polyp isn't found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, surgery is needed. Surgery is also needed for rectal cancer that forms as a lesion on the rectal wall. The true extent of the cancer can't be known until after surgery. But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options.
964	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. CT scan with contrast and/or MRI with or without contast of main tumor and neck As needed: • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Pre-anesthesia exam • FDG-PET/CT • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • Dental exam and x-ray (Panorex) • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B Tobacco and alcohol use history Dental exam Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works.Their use can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns. Physical exam Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched.
965	Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced esophageal cancer has invaded other layers of the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic esophageal cancer. Distant metastases could be in the liver, distant lymph nodes, and lung. 2 Diagnosing esophageal cancer Test results General health tests Nutritional assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results.
966	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
967	It sends and receives radio waves. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. An MRI may cause your body to feel warm. If MRI is being used to better see cancer near the rectum, an enema may be needed. Or a gel may be inserted into the rectum beforehand. CT scan CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. CT takes many pictures of the inside of the body using -rays. A computer combines the -rays to make one detailed picture. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colon cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. If you are interested in potentially having children in the future, tell your care team. They will discuss any fertilityrelated risks of your treatment plan with you. Some methods for preserving (keeping) fertility before cancer treatment are described below. Your doctor may refer you for counseling about fertility preservation options. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation.
968	Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation. If any lymph nodes feel enlarged or look suspicious on imaging tests, a sample may be removed for testing. A thin needle may be used to remove a sample of tissue from the node(s). This is called fine-needle aspiration (FNA). In some cases, all or part of a lymph node may be removed by cutting into the skin. This is called an excisional biopsy. Imaging Imaging for anal cancer allows your doctors to see areas inside the body in detail. Imaging tests provide information on the extent of the cancer and whether it has spread to distant areas (metastasized). To learn the extent of anal cancer in the anus and nearby areas (including lymph nodes), either computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended. To look for areas of cancer beyond the pelvis, a CT scan of the chest and abdomen with contrast is recommended. In some cases, positron emission tomography (PET) may be combined with a CT or MRI. CT, MRI, and PET are described below.
969	CT scans are good at showing if the cancer has spread outside of the ovaries. They may also show if nearby lymph nodes are bigger than normal. This can be a sign that the cancer has spread. If you can have it, a substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Before the scan you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent will also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, allergic reactions can occur. Tell your team if you've had an allergic reaction to contrast in the past. A CT scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. While you lie on a table that moves through the tunnel, the scanner will rotate an x-ray beam around you to take pictures from many angles. MRI If the ultrasound images are unclear, you may have magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your abdomen and pelvis. An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation.
970	All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA. While most PSA goes into semen, a little bit ends up in the bloodstream, too. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. Likewise, an increase in PSA after treatment may indicate that the treatment is losing effectiveness. However, age and other factors—such as an enlarged prostate or a urinary tract infection— can also cause high levels of PSA. This means that a PSA test by itself can’t provide a diagnosis of prostate cancer. That’s why a PSA test is often paired with imaging or a digital rectal exam, or both, to decide whether you need a biopsy. PSA level (also called total PSA) is measured in nanograms of PSA per milliliter (ng/mL) of blood. PSA testing Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a protein made inside the prostate gland. If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer.
971	h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. h Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a slowgrowing (indolent) lymphoma that typically forms tumors in the lymph nodes. However, FL can be found in other parts of the body. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes form clusters (follicles) in the germinal centers of lymph nodes. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. 2 Testing for FL Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Performance status Blood tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for FL biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Key points Accurate testing is essential to diagnose and treat follicular lymphoma (FL). This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Follicular lymphoma (FL) might be found because of swollen lymph nodes or an enlarged spleen. Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans.
972	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
973	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
974	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
975	A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan). PET/CT imaging may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. A PET/CT scan takes images of the whole body to find cancer. Imaging after diagnosis may also include an ultrasound of the testicles. However, if the whole-body PET/CT scan didn’t find anything, then this imaging test may not be needed. Blood tests Blood tests can also help establish the extent of the cancer and provide other information needed for planning your treatment. The following blood tests are recommended: Complete blood count (CBC) is a common blood test that measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) is a group of 14 different blood tests that provides information about your blood sugar, calcium, and electrolyte levels, and the health of your liver and kidneys. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme.
976	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
977	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
978	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
979	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
980	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
981	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases.
982	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
983	Primary CNS lymphoma is frequently linked to HIV, the immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Carrying the Epstein-Barr virus, which is the virus that causes mononucleosis (“mono”) and other illnesses. Epstein-Barr is one of the most common viruses in humans. Most people are infected with it. After you’re infected, the virus remains dormant (inactive or “sleeping”) in your body for life. Having an autoimmune disease, such as lupus, in which the immune system overreacts and attacks healthy tissues and organs. Having an organ transplant, which requires medications that suppress the immune system. This leads to a higher risk of infections. Being an older adult. Although primary CNS lymphoma can occur at any age, the majority of people diagnosed with it are in their 60s or 70s. How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Primary CNS lymphoma is often found when a person develops symptoms. A symptom is a feeling or problem that may be a sign of disease. Symptoms usually develop over several weeks. Primary CNS lymphoma can cause a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain.
984	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
985	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
986	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
987	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
988	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
989	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
990	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
991	Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well. Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) starts in the mucus-making cells of the inner lining of the esophagus. Adenocarcinomas are often found in the lower esophagus but can occur in the middle esophagus as well. Today, most esophageal cancers in North America and Western Europe are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell carcinoma is more common in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. Treatment is based on the type and location of esophageal cancer, in addition to the stage of the tumor (where it is in the body). Some tumors that start in the stomach and cross over into the area between the esophagus and stomach (esophagogastric junction) are treated as esophageal cancers and not as stomach cancers. However, this depends on the exact location of the tumor. Siewert types used as part of cancer staging describe where the tumor is relative to the esophagus and stomach. Barrett esophagus In Barrett esophagus (BE), the squamous cells that line the lower part of the esophagus have changed or been replaced with abnormal cells as a result of chronic reflux.
992	Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus.
993	Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus.
994	Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle. Striated muscle generates force and contracts. It is under your control (voluntary). Middle esophagus The middle part of the esophagus is a mixture of striated and smooth muscle. Lower esophagus The lower part of the esophagus consists only of smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is not under your control. It is involuntary, like a reflex. Esophagogastric junction The esophagogastric junction (EGJ) is the place where the stomach and the esophagus meet, found just beneath the diaphragm. It is also called the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). It separates the contents of the esophagus from the contents of the stomach (acid). Esophageal cancer Cancer of the esophagus (or esophageal cancer) starts when cells in the epithelium of the esophagus begin to grow out of control. There are 2 types of esophageal cancer: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well.
995	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
996	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
997	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
998	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
999	Guide 1 Possible tests Medical history and physical exam (H&P) by multidisciplinary team. Medical photographs will also be taken. Complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) including liver function tests (LFTs), and alkaline phosphatase Biopsy with pathology review Determine tumor status including: • Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) hormone receptor (HR) status • HER2 status Address fertility, birth control, and sexual health concerns Genetic counseling and testing if at risk for hereditary breast cancer Imaging: • Diagnostic mammogram. Ultrasound and breast MRI, as needed • Chest CT. Contrast might be used. • CT or MRI of abdomen with or without pelvis. Contrast will be used. • Bone scan or PET-CT Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes.
1000	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1001	A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell. Hormones recognize and bind to specific hormone receptors. When hormones attach to receptors on breast cancer cells, they can cause cancer to grow. If found, these receptors may be targeted using endocrine therapy. There are 2 types of hormone receptors: Estrogen – plays a role in breast development Progesterone – plays a role in menstrual cycle and pregnancy Hormone receptor (HR) testing should be done on any new tumors. A biopsy sample will be used. Hormone receptor-positive In hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, IHC finds estrogen and/or progesterone hormone receptors. Most breast cancers are . Estrogen receptor (ER) is stimulated by estrogen and provides survival and proliferation (rapid growth) signals. Cancer cells deprived of estrogen or which have their ER signal blocked with treatment may stop growing or die. Progesterone receptor (PR) binds progesterone and also provides survival and proliferation signals. It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling.
1002	Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread.
1003	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1004	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
1005	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1006	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1007	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1008	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1009	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1010	Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches.
1011	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that fights infection. h T lymphocytes or T cells help kill tumor cells and help control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus.
1012	Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Your care team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: IDHGenes are written with italics like this: IDHWhen a gene or protein is found, it is shown with a plus sign like this: . When a gene or protein has not been found, it is written with a negative sign like this: IDH1-. Ewing sarcoma A cell must make a copy of its chromosomes before dividing into two cells. Sometimes, there are mistakes in the copies. One type of mistake is when parts (DNA) of two chromosomes break off and switch with each other. This is called a translocation. It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma.
1013	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1014	Undergarments can be worn during the exam. The gown will be adjusted to allow your doctor to see different areas. How often you should be checked depends on whether the cancer was local (not in nearby lymph nodes) or regional (in nearby lymph nodes). For local CSCC, monitoring during the first 2 years after treatment is the most important. Exams should occur at least every 3 to 12 months (for patients who are low risk) or every 3 to 6 months (for patients who are high risk) during this time. If no further skin cancer develops in the first 2 years, then exams are spaced out to every 6 to 12 months (once or twice a year) for another 3 years. After that, having an exam once a year for the rest of your life is recommended by NCCN experts. For very high-risk local CSCC, exams should occur every 3 to 6 months during the first 2 years, then every 6 months for the next 3 Skin exams by your doctor After finishing treatment, you should have your skin examined by a doctor on a regular basis.
1015	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
1016	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1017	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1018	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1019	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1020	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1021	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
1022	Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor.
1023	In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells. This oversupply of abnormal B cells prevents healthy B cells from performing their duties effectively. This results in fewer healthy blood cells and a higher risk of infection. What are the symptoms of CLL? Usually, CLL doesn’t cause symptoms at first. It may be found due to routine blood testing. Symptoms of CLL may include the following. See a health care professional as soon as you can if you have any of these symptoms: Swollen glands in your neck, or you feel swelling in your stomach Feel tired more easily or fatigue Excessive sweating or night sweats Fever Infections that keep coming back despite treatment Loss of appetite or becoming full too quickly (early satiety) Unintentional weight loss What causes CLL? The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow.
1024	Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have. Treatment Surgery is recommended to treat squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Surgery for regional CSCC involves excision (removal) of the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Although surgery is preferred, it may not be an option for one or more reasons. In this case, see If surgery is not an option below for information. If surgery is very risky or might not completely remove your cancer, your doctor may suggest immunotherapy with cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo) first. It may shrink the tumor and make surgery less risky. Head and neck tumors Lymph nodes may be removed from one or both sides of the neck during surgery for head and neck tumors. The extent of surgery depends on the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. After surgery, radiation therapy is often given to decrease the chance of the tumor returning. Systemic therapy is sometimes used in addition to radiation therapy after surgery.
1025	A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine.
1026	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
1027	However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer.
1028	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
1029	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
1030	For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Germline mutations in genes like BRCA1 or BRCA2 are also related to breast cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, and skin cancer (melanoma). Germline mutations in MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 are related to colorectal and uterine cancers in addition to prostate cancer. If a germline mutation is suspected based on your family’s or your own health history, you should ask about testing. Your doctor can talk to you about testing or refer you to a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases. A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and help you interpret the results of these tests.
1031	These check your kidney function. Liver function tests may also be ordered. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. This includes keeping alert for symptoms of cancer recurrence. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence This section discusses cervical cancer that does not improve with treatment (persistent) or that returns after treatment (recurrent). If your doctor suspects recurrence based on your symptoms or a physical exam, you will have imaging tests to check. This could include CT, PET, and/or MRI. Surgery to look inside the body (exploratory surgery) may be helpful in some cases. The goal is to learn the extent of the cancer. This can help guide treatment decisions. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Biomarkers are often mutations (changes) in particular genes. They can also be proteins that are made in response to the cancer. Biomarker testing is recommended for all recurrent cervical cancers. The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials.
1032	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
1033	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
1034	Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss. About kidney cancer The kidneys How the kidneys work Kidney cancer RCC subtypes How kidney cancer spreads Key points The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. The kidneys make hormones and filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. This chapter will discuss the kidneys and provide an overview of kidney cancer. The kidneys The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. Each kidney is about the size of an adult’s fist. The kidney is covered by a thin layer of tissue, like the skin of an apple. This layer of tissue is called the renal capsule. Renal refers to the kidney. The kidneys are part of the urinary system. The urinary system is a group of organs that remove waste from the body in the form of urine (or pee). This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure.
1035	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
1036	Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health. These include a neurological exam and an evaluation of your level of activity. After these, you’ll have imaging scans and one or more biopsies. Neurological exam This exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, balance, coordination, reflexes, hearing, and other senses. Your doctor may also perform an eye exam to look at the health of the nerves in the back of your eye. Performance status Your care team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status. The more activities you can do, the better your performance status. Your care team uses this evaluation to get a sense of the level of treatment you may be able to handle and whether you may be eligible for a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer.
1037	Although many people with primary CNS lymphoma have only one visible tumor, others have multiple tumors on their scan. Testing after diagnosis also checks for signs of cancer in the eyes, cerebrospinal fluid, blood, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and possibly the bone marrow and testicles. These tests include: Eye exam Your eyes are connected directly to the brain by the optic nerves. So primary CNS lymphoma doesn’t travel far to spread from the brain to the eyes. (Very rarely it starts in the eyes and spreads to the brain.) If lymphoma occurs in the eye, it often forms in the back of the eye, called the retina. The retina converts what you see into signals, which it sends through the optic nerves to the brain. Lymphoma cells can also invade the vitreous, the clear gel that fills the eye. When primary CNS lymphoma involves the eyes, it’s called vitreoretinal lymphoma. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye exam. This is done at an eye doctor’s office using a slit lamp, a microscope with a bright light. You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils.
1038	Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy If cancer cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or if an MRI of the spine shows cancer, chemotherapy may be infused directly into the CSF in some cases. This is known as intrathecal or intra-CSF chemotherapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used in select cases or as part of specific treatment program for primary CNS lymphoma. Intraocular chemotherapy In rare cases, primary CNS lymphoma may occur in the eye. In these situations, the chemotherapy may be infused into a vein or directly into the eye. Possible side effects from intraocular chemotherapy include eye irritation, infection, inflammation, and cataracts. Cataracts can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Side effects of chemotherapy Like other therapies, the side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors. These include the drug, the dose, and the person. Chemotherapy, especially in high doses, may not be the right treatment for people who are frail or older. These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects.
1039	Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy If cancer cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or if an MRI of the spine shows cancer, chemotherapy may be infused directly into the CSF in some cases. This is known as intrathecal or intra-CSF chemotherapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used in select cases or as part of specific treatment program for primary CNS lymphoma. Intraocular chemotherapy In rare cases, primary CNS lymphoma may occur in the eye. In these situations, the chemotherapy may be infused into a vein or directly into the eye. Possible side effects from intraocular chemotherapy include eye irritation, infection, inflammation, and cataracts. Cataracts can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Side effects of chemotherapy Like other therapies, the side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors. These include the drug, the dose, and the person. Chemotherapy, especially in high doses, may not be the right treatment for people who are frail or older. These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects.
1040	The most commonly used radiation technique for primary CNS lymphoma is treatment of the entire brain, called whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT). Because primary CNS lymphoma can occur in multiple spots anywhere in the brain, WBRT is used to treat the entire brain all at once. WBRT can also reach the upper part of the spine and a part or all of the eyeballs. WBRT even treats microscopic tumors in the CNS that aren’t visible on an MRI scan. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be fitted with a mask or supports to help you keep still. Side effects of radiation therapy Your radiation oncologist will discuss the possible side effects of WBRT. Side effects Radiation therapy Radiation therapy sends beams of intense energy to kill cancer cells. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be fitted with a mask or supports to help you lie still. differ among people. Common side effects include headaches, nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment.
1041	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
1042	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help identify cancer in primary sites, lymph nodes, and/or distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel.
1043	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
1044	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
1045	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1046	Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place.
1047	PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer. However, high PSA levels can vary by age, race, and other factors: Age – PSA level tends to increase with age. For people in their 40s, a PSA level above 5 ng/mL is very suspicious for disease. For those in their 60s, 5 ng/mL or higher is suspicious. A PSA level of 10 ng/mL or higher is a danger sign at any age. Race – Normal PSA levels tend to be higher in Black males than in white males—about 1 point higher on average among males of the same age. Researchers don’t know the reason for this difference, but they’re investigating it. Enlarged prostate – The larger the prostate, the more PSA it can make. Other health issues besides cancer can also cause an enlarged prostate. h Sex and exercise – PSA may increase after ejaculation or vigorous exercise. Your doctor may recommend avoiding sex and exercise for 2 or 3 days before a PSA test. This short break allows PSA to return to its usual level.
1048	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
1049	Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. This is called egg freezing or oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mismatch repair testing All colon cancers should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Testing for this biomarker involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Cancers that do not have these biomarkers are called microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history.
1050	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
1051	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
1052	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
1053	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
1054	They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
1055	Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. It makes hormones that help regulate metabolism and other body functions. Thyroid cancers start as small, often round areas of abnormal growth called nodules. Most don’t cause symptoms and are benign. Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. The most well-known risk factors are radiation exposure and a family history of thyroid cancer. 2 Testing 9 TSH test 9 Ultrasound 10 Biopsy 11 Key points If a thyroid nodule is found or suspected, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) blood test and an ultrasound of the thyroid and neck are needed. Your doctor uses the results to decide whether a biopsy is needed. TSH test Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone made by the pituitary gland, located near the base of the brain. TSH controls the hormones made by the thyroid. A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous.
1056	Many people wonder why they got cancer. Cancer experts don’t know exactly what causes bladder cells to grow out of control. What they do know is that bladder cancer and other cancers start with abnormal changes (mutations) in the genes of cells. Genes are tiny parts of a cell that carry the instructions for how cells behave. These instructions also control how new cells are made. Sometimes, mutations can mix up these instructions. This can turn normal cells into cancer cells. In most people with bladder cancer, these mutations aren’t passed down in families (hereditary mutation). They happen on their own and only in cancer cells. Still, you may have a higher risk for bladder cancer if another family member also had bladder cancer. In rare cases, mutations in these genes can be passed down in families. This results in an increased risk of getting bladder cancer. However, only some individuals with these genetic mutations go on to develop bladder cancer. What are the risk factors for bladder cancer? A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause bladder cancer.
1057	What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk.
1058	Tumors often release molecules that can be used as clues for finding and learning about the cancer. This information helps figure out the likelihood that your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. It can also help predict whether the cancer could transform into a more aggressive type. Importantly, targeted therapies (PARP inhibitors, for example) can be used against cancers that have particular molecular tumor markers. So the testing looks for specific abnormalities in a number of genes involved in DNA repair, including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, FANCA, and others. Tumor staging Tumors come in different shapes and sizes. So it’s not easy to compare one tumor to another. To solve this problem, cancer experts created the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system to describe any tumor. It’s based on the results of your imaging scans, biopsies, and blood tests.
1059	If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome. FAP can cause hundreds to thousands of polyps to form in the colon and rectum. The polyps start as benign growths, but over time can become invasive rectal cancer. There are other inherited syndromes that are even more rare than Lynch syndrome and FAP. If your provider thinks you may have an inherited syndrome, they will refer you to a genetic counselor. This expert can talk with you and your family about getting tested for syndromes related to rectal cancer. If they determine that testing is appropriate, they can order a blood or saliva test to see if you have an inherited gene mutation. Blood tests General health tests A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots.
1060	Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade. The grade measures how aggressive the cancer is. It’s a rating of how fast the cancer will likely grow and spread. To figure out the grade, a sample of your tumor will be studied in a laboratory by a pathologist. The pathologist will compare the cancer cells to normal cells. The more different they look, the higher the grade. And the higher the grade, the faster the cancer is expected to spread. LG means that the cancer cells are low grade (slow growing). HG means that the cancer cells are high grade (fast growing). The inner lining of the bladder is made of urothelial cells. Most cases of bladder cancer start in the urothelial cells. So this type of cancer is called urothelial cancer. But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes.
1061	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1062	Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen.
1063	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
1064	Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. This means that the cells of the cancer look like the cells of a sarcoma (cancer of the connective tissues, such as muscles, nerves, fat, blood vessels, and fibrous tissue). Sarcomatoid renal cancers occur in less than of RCC tumors but when present tend to grow more quickly than other types of kidney cancer and are more likely to spread to other parts of the body. This makes them more difficult to treat. How kidney cancer spreads Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Kidney cancer can also spread to other parts of the body in a process called metastasis. In metastasis, cancer cells travel through your blood or lymph to form new tumors outside of the kidney. The new tumors are called metastatic tumors or metastases. Local spread – In locally advanced disease, cancer has spread to a nearby area close to the primary tumor. Kidney cancer can invade nearby tissues like surrounding fat, blood vessels, lymph nodes, adrenal glands, and Gerota’s fascia.
1065	Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow.
1066	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
1067	The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum).
1068	Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall. Stage 0is stands for carcinoma in situ (CIS). This is a flat patch of cancer cells that hasn’t grown any farther than where it started. It’s still on the surface of the bladder lining and has yet to invade deeper layers. However, carcinoma in situ is fast-growing, aggressive, and can be very serious. Stage 1 Stage 1 has grown through the inner lining of the bladder wall and into the layer of connective tissue. But stage 1 hasn’t invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall (non– muscle-invasive). Stage 2 Stage 2 bladder cancer has grown into the muscle layer (muscle-invasive), but it hasn’t reached the fatty layer covering the outside of the bladder nor has it spread anywhere else. Stage 3 Stage 3 has grown through the bladder wall and into the fatty layer surrounding the bladder. It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis).
1069	APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer. This type of surgery is also used for some rectal cancers. In addition to the anus, APR typically involves removing the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and the fatty tissue surrounding the rectum. Lymph nodes in the groin will also be removed during surgery if any are known to have cancer. This is known as a groin dissection. Radiation treatment for anal cancer weakens and damages the perineum, which can interfere with healing after APR. In some cases, closing the wound requires taking tissue from another area of the body. This is known as muscle flap reconstruction. It can improve healing of the perineum and reduce complications after surgery. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominis, along with skin, fat, and blood vessels, is often used for reconstruction. If APR is planned, ask your doctor about muscle flap reconstruction. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment.
1070	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
1071	If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase 4 trials study the long-term safety and benefit of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health.
1072	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET-CT scan. It may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. Sodium fluoride PET-CT A sodium fluoride PET-CT might be used instead of a bone scan. In this test, the radiotracer is made of sodium fluoride. FDG PET-CT An FDG PET-CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET-CT may not be needed. FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis.
1073	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET-CT scan. It may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. Sodium fluoride PET-CT A sodium fluoride PET-CT might be used instead of a bone scan. In this test, the radiotracer is made of sodium fluoride. FDG PET-CT An FDG PET-CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET-CT may not be needed. FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis.
1074	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
1075	If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a biopsy. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental -ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaws, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
1076	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
1077	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
1078	Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. Breast MRI If needed, a breast MRI will be used in addition to a mammogram. Contrast should be used. You will be positioned face down in the machine with your arms above your head. Spine and brain MRI An MRI can be used to detect breast cancer that has spread (metastasize) to your spine or brain. For a brain MRI, a device is placed around your head. For a spine MRI, no device is worn. Contrast should be used in an MRI. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body.
1079	A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed.
1080	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
1081	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
1082	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
1083	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
1084	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1085	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
1086	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
1087	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
1088	In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone.
1089	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
1090	A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy. A radiation oncologist is an expert in the use of radiation therapy to treat cancer. Your primary care physician (PCP) and gynecologist can also be a part of your team. These health care providers can help you express your feelings about your care to the team. Treatment of other health problems may be improved if they are aware of and involved in your cancer care. In addition to doctors, you may receive care from nurses, social workers, and other health experts. Ask to have the names and contact information of your health care providers included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment There isn't a treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one treatment option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your doctors agree on should be described in the treatment plan. All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome.
1091	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
1092	A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy. A radiation oncologist is an expert in the use of radiation therapy to treat cancer. Your primary care physician (PCP) and gynecologist can also be a part of your team. These health care providers can help you express your feelings about your care to the team. Treatment of other health problems may be improved if they are aware of and involved in your cancer care. In addition to doctors, you may receive care from nurses, social workers, and other health experts. Ask to have the names and contact information of your health care providers included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment There isn't a treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one treatment option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your doctors agree on should be described in the treatment plan. All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome.
1093	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1094	Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
1095	HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). To find a donor match, your proteins will be compared to the donor’s proteins to see how many proteins are the same. A very good match is needed for a transplant to be a treatment option. Otherwise, your body will reject the donor cells or the donor cells will react against your body. Blood or tissue samples from you and your blood relatives will be tested first. Fertility (all genders) Treatment with targeted therapy and other forms of systemic therapy can affect your fertility, or the ability to have children. If possible, ask your care team before starting therapy how cancer and cancer treatment might affect your fertility. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
1096	If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. For more information on fertility preservation, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important.
1097	Some types of treatment for bone cancer can affect fertility. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting treatment. A diagnosis of bone cancer is confirmed using a core needle or surgical biopsy. The placement of the biopsy is critical. Therefore, it is recommended that the biopsy be performed at an experienced surgeon at the center where you will receive treatment. A sample from a biopsy of your tumor might be tested to look for biomarkers or proteins. Your health care provider might refer you for genetic testing to learn more about your cancer. Questions to ask What type of bone cancer do I have? What does this mean in terms of my prognosis and treatment options? h Is there a sarcoma cancer center or hospital nearby that specializes in this type of cancer? What tests will I have? How often will they be repeated? Will my insurance pay for these tests? Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed?
1098	HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). To find a donor match, your proteins will be compared to the donor’s proteins to see how many proteins are the same. A very good match is needed for a transplant to be a treatment option. Otherwise, your body will reject the donor cells or the donor cells will react against your body. Blood or tissue samples from you and your blood relatives will be tested first. Fertility (all genders) Treatment with targeted therapy and other forms of systemic therapy can affect your fertility, or the ability to have children. If possible, ask your care team before starting therapy how cancer and cancer treatment might affect your fertility. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
1099	PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment.
1100	Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history. Blood tests A complete blood count (CBC), chemistry profile, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test are recommended as part of initial testing. Imaging CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. Fertility and family planning Young adults diagnosed with colon cancer should be counseled about fertility related risks of treatment and options for preserving fertility. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Treatment for non-metastatic cancer 14 Polyps with cancer Invasive cancer Chemotherapy after surgery Surveillance Key points Colon cancer often forms in polyps on the lining of the colon, but can also form as lesions. This chapter explains treatment for cancer that has not spread to areas far from the colon. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the colon wall. The most common type is called an adenoma.
1101	Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
1102	Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS). Everyone with rectal cancer should be asked about their family health history. MRI of the pelvis using a rectal cancer staging technique can show the extent of the cancer in the rectum and nearby lymph nodes. CT of the chest and abdomen can show if the cancer has spread to the liver, lungs, or other organs. If you want the option of having children in the future, or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will inform you of any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan and your options for preserving fertility. 66 When you’re up at 1 am, don’t “Dr. Google.” Go to reputable sites that have patient/caregiver information and resources. Recent, medically reviewed resources are more valuable than random Google results." 3 Treatment for non-metastatic cancer 5 Polyps with cancer Early rectal cancer Locally advanced cancer Recurrence Key points Rectal cancer often forms in polyps on the lining of the rectum, but can also form as lesions. This chapter explains treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to areas far from the rectum.
1103	Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place.
1104	The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI). LVSI means that there are tumor cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels inside the tumor. Cancers with LVSI are more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes. Nearby lymph nodes are more likely to be removed. Fertility-sparing treatment Surgical treatment for early-stage cervical cancer often involves surgery that removes the uterus (hysterectomy). Carrying a pregnancy is not possible after a hysterectomy. If the cancer has not spread beyond the cervix (stage 1), fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. If fertility-sparing treatment is being considered, ask your doctor about getting the opinion of a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. A fertility-sparing approach is not appropriate for some uncommon types of cervical cancer. Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed.
1105	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
1106	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
1107	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1108	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
1109	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
1110	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
1111	Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures. It is done while you are awake with a topical spray to make you more comfortable. Laryngoscopy and nasolaryngoscopy Laryngoscopy is an exam of the back of your throat, including your voice box (larynx) or behind your voice box (hypopharynx). It uses a laryngoscope, which is a thin, long tube fitted with a fiberoptic light. Your voice box contains your vocal cords and allows you to speak. A laryngoscope is used to look for tumors in the throat and voice box (larynx) and hypopharynx. Laryngoscopy may be done in different ways: Indirect laryngoscopy uses a small mirror held at the back of your throat. The doctor shines a light on the mirror to view the throat area. Medicine to numb the back of your throat may be used. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy (nasolaryngoscopy) uses a small flexible scope passed through your nose and into your throat. Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute.
1112	h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. During a physical exam, your health care provider may: It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, they might be recommended before starting certain treatment. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since the oropharynx is found inside the throat, some parts are not easy to see when your mouth is open. A doctor might use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope passed through your mouth or nose to look at these areas. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer, and your feelings can change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help.
1113	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
1114	This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There is a subtype of HCC called fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHC). FLHC affects very few people and usually occurs at a younger age. The second most common type of primary liver cancer in adults is called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which is a cancer of the bile ducts. Other primary liver cancers in adults include rare types of sarcoma that start in the blood vessel cells of the liver. Another rare type is made of both hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. This is called a mixed-type tumor. More information on gallbladder and bile duct tumors is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. In the following pages, this patient guideline will focus on the most common type of liver cancer, HCC, and its treatment. How liver cancer spreads Liver cancer can spread in many ways. It can spread directly through the liver. It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone.
1115	Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. This means that the cells of the cancer look like the cells of a sarcoma (cancer of the connective tissues, such as muscles, nerves, fat, blood vessels, and fibrous tissue). Sarcomatoid renal cancers occur in less than of RCC tumors but when present tend to grow more quickly than other types of kidney cancer and are more likely to spread to other parts of the body. This makes them more difficult to treat. How kidney cancer spreads Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Kidney cancer can also spread to other parts of the body in a process called metastasis. In metastasis, cancer cells travel through your blood or lymph to form new tumors outside of the kidney. The new tumors are called metastatic tumors or metastases. Local spread – In locally advanced disease, cancer has spread to a nearby area close to the primary tumor. Kidney cancer can invade nearby tissues like surrounding fat, blood vessels, lymph nodes, adrenal glands, and Gerota’s fascia.
1116	If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter. Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Primary cutaneous lymphomas Key points Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) starts in B cells, a type of white blood cell called a lymphocyte. These cells make antibodies to fight infections and are an important part of the lymphatic system. CBCL appears as a nodule under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Lymphatic system Lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer. It affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germfighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. Lymph gives cells water and food. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes, help fight infection and disease. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow.
1117	In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection.
1118	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding.
1119	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
1120	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
1121	A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine.
1122	Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation. If any lymph nodes feel enlarged or look suspicious on imaging tests, a sample may be removed for testing. A thin needle may be used to remove a sample of tissue from the node(s). This is called fine-needle aspiration (FNA). In some cases, all or part of a lymph node may be removed by cutting into the skin. This is called an excisional biopsy. Imaging Imaging for anal cancer allows your doctors to see areas inside the body in detail. Imaging tests provide information on the extent of the cancer and whether it has spread to distant areas (metastasized). To learn the extent of anal cancer in the anus and nearby areas (including lymph nodes), either computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended. To look for areas of cancer beyond the pelvis, a CT scan of the chest and abdomen with contrast is recommended. In some cases, positron emission tomography (PET) may be combined with a CT or MRI. CT, MRI, and PET are described below.
1123	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
1124	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
1125	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
1126	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
1127	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
1128	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1129	Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth. Normally, these are thin, flat cells and are similar to the top layer of skin and surface lining some other parts of the body such as the lungs and esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer and is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer can develop in the parts that make up the mouth such as: Lips (mucosal lip) Gums (gingiva) Lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa) Front two-thirds of the tongue Roof of the mouth (hard palate) Bony, raised areas that hold the teeth sockets (alveolar ridge) h Floor of the mouth (under the tongue) Small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone) Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip is not included in this book. The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth.
1130	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
1131	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
1132	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples About CML 5 What is CML? 7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste.
1133	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples About CML 5 What is CML? 7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste.
1134	You will get through this. It might seem hard at times toward the end of treatment and the following weeks and months while you recover, but it will pass. I tried to just stay focused on the goal of getting through to the other side to whatever comes next. – Thom Anal cancer survivor Ostomy You can still lead an active lifestyle with an ostomy. However, it is a good idea to consult with an ostomy professional before any vigorous or high-intensity physical activity. Healthy habits Monitoring for the return of anal cancer is important after finishing treatment. But, it is also important to keep up with other aspects of your health. Steps you can take to help prevent other health issues and to improve your quality of life are described next. Get screened for other types of cancer, such as breast, cervical, colorectal, or prostate cancer. Your primary care doctor should tell you what cancer screening tests you should have based on your sex, age, and risk level. Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight.
1135	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1136	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
1137	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
1138	Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances.
1139	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
1140	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
1141	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
1142	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
1143	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1144	During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. You will be able to hear and speak with a technician at all times. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and mixed with a liquid to drink. You may feel flushed or get hives. Some people have an allergic reaction. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not often used to plan treatment for colon cancer. Your doctor may order an MRI to get a better look at the liver or rectum, or if the CT scan results are unclear. Getting an MRI is much like getting a CT scan. In some cases, the area of the body being imaged is placed within a narrowed coil device that looks like a brace. It covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. It sends and receives radio waves. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. An MRI may cause your body to feel warm.
1145	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1146	Imaging If biopsy results confirm that the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, a computed tomography (CT) scan of lymph nodes near the CSCC is recommended. The goal is to learn about the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. More advanced imaging tests like a PET/CT, that uses special injectable agents to detect cancer, may be needed to see if cancer has spread farther than the lymph nodes, or to help plan treatment. Testing Biopsy If lymph nodes near the CSCC feel swollen or look abnormal on initial imaging tests, the next step is a biopsy. The types of biopsies used for squamous cell skin cancer are fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and core needle biopsy. FNA is also known simply as needle biopsy. Surgical evaluation The results of testing will be considered in order to determine if you are a candidate for surgery to remove the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have.
1147	This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen. A thin tube with a light and a camera (laparoscope) is used to view the lining of the abdomen and the surface of organs in the abdomen. Tissue samples are taken and tested for cancer cells in a lab. Biopsy To diagnose ovarian cancer, a sample of tissue must be removed from your body for testing. This is called a biopsy. The biopsy is usually done during initial surgery to remove the cancer. But sometimes a biopsy is done to diagnose ovarian cancer before surgery or other planned treatment. This may be the case if the cancer has spread too much to be removed by surgery initially and chemotherapy is needed first. In such cases, a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, core biopsy, or paracentesis may be used. FNA uses a very thin needle to remove a small sample of tissue from the tumor. A core biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle. For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing.
1148	Induction The first (induction) phase of treatment can last several months. Treatment typically requires multiple courses of chemotherapy, which are given while in the hospital. The options for induction treatment are listed in Guide 1 and discussed here: Clinical trial Clinical trials allow you to receive treatment while also helping researchers learn more about this uncommon cancer. Everyone with primary CNS lymphoma is encouraged to consider enrolling in a clinical trial. The treatment you receive in the trial may or may not work better than the standard treatments for primary CNS lymphoma. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial you may be eligible for. If you don’t want to join a clinical trial or none are available for you, the recommended induction treatment is high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy, often given with other chemotherapies. High-dose chemotherapy The most effective chemotherapy drug for primary CNS lymphoma is methotrexate. Methotrexate has been used for many years to treat a variety of cancers. It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate.
1149	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
1150	Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on supportive care is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Stage 3 Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for all stage 3 colon cancers. Preferred regimens include CAPEOX and FOLFOX. Other recommended options include capecitabine and 5-FU. Chemotherapy is typically given for 3 to 6 months. The length of treatment depends on the regimen and the risk of recurrence. Surveillance Follow-up testing is started when there are no signs of cancer after treatment. It can help find new cancer growth early. Stage 1 A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery for stage 1 cancers. If the results are normal, your next colonoscopy should be in 3 years, and then every 5 years. If a concerning or high-risk adenoma is found, your next colonoscopy will be needed within 1 year. If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis.
1151	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
1152	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
1153	Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor.
1154	Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade. The grade helps tell how your lymphoma should be treated. Two different organizations categorize FL based on grade. In the 2022 World Health Organization classification (WHO5), follicular lymphoma grades 1, 2, and 3A are termed classic FL (cFL). International Consensus classification (ICC) groups grades 1 and 2 as cFL. This book follows the ICC classification system. h FL grade 1 and 2 are treated as classic FL according to the ICC. h Grade 3A might be treated as classic FL or DLBCL depending on the cancer center and the types of cells found with testing. FL grade 3B (FL3B) called follicular large B cell lymphoma in the WHO5 is rare. It is treated as DLBCL. Types of FL The following types of FL are described in this book. Classic FL As mentioned on the previous page, classic FL (cFL) is grade 1 or Almost everyone with FL has a chromosome translocation or has excess levels of the BCL2 protein in their tumor.
1155	The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors. Radiation exposure Anyone who has had radiation treatment to the head or neck in the past (to treat a childhood cancer, for example) is at increased risk of thyroid cancer. Contact with large amounts of radiation in the environment as a result of a catastrophic event also increases the risk of developing a thyroid cancer. Family history Most thyroid cancers are sporadic, meaning there is no clear cause or risk factor. Only a small number are hereditary, or the result of inherited gene mutations (changes). A personal or family history of thyroid cancer or a related syndrome may increase the risk of thyroid cancer. Syndromes related to thyroid cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Carney complex, Cowden syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Cowden syndrome is also known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). This inherited syndrome can cause follicular thyroid cancer, and other cancers and health problems. Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck.
1156	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
1157	That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned. The most common kind of bladder cancer starts in the urothelial cells, which are stretchy cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells also form the inner layer in the rest of the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys, the ureters, and the urethra. Cancer of the urothelium can start in these areas instead of the bladder, although it’s less common. Other (non-urothelial) types of bladder cancer are much less common. These include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. How is bladder cancer found? Bladder cancer is usually found when a person has symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may signal a disease or condition. The most common symptom of bladder cancer, and the one that usually appears first, is having blood in your urine (hematuria). How does blood get into urine? Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red.
1158	If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter. Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Primary cutaneous lymphomas Key points Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) starts in B cells, a type of white blood cell called a lymphocyte. These cells make antibodies to fight infections and are an important part of the lymphatic system. CBCL appears as a nodule under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Lymphatic system Lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer. It affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germfighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. Lymph gives cells water and food. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes, help fight infection and disease. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow.
1159	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1160	Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red. Or, if there isn’t enough blood to be visible, your urine may look normal. But your clinical team can still detect blood by looking at a sample of the urine under a microscope. Blood in the urine can be caused by many other things besides bladder cancer. The most common cause is an infection in the urinary tract. So anyone with blood in their urine should see a health care provider to get their urine tested. Other symptoms of bladder cancer include: Frequent urination Urgency to urinate Painful urination Back pain Not every person with bladder cancer will have all these symptoms. Some people will have no symptoms. A person with one or more of these symptoms should visit a doctor or other health care provider who can recommend different tests. These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean?
1161	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
1162	However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer.
1163	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
1164	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
1165	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
1166	It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion.
1167	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
1168	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1169	If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy. 5 When treatment is over Skin exams by your doctor Prevention for patients at high-risk Steps you can take Key points You’ve finished treatment. Now you may be wondering if—or when—cancer might return. Because you’ve already had squamous cell skin cancer, you are at higher risk of getting it again. You’re also at higher risk of getting other types of skin cancer. This chapter explains how you can help prevent and detect future skin cancers. Skin exams by your doctor After finishing treatment, getting regular skin exams to monitor for the return of squamous cell skin cancer is very important. These followup exams should include a complete check of the skin on your entire body, as well as the lymph nodes closest to the cancer site. You will be asked to undress and put on a paper gown or drape. Undergarments can be worn during the exam. The gown will be adjusted to allow your doctor to see different areas.
1170	Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see. The contrast is injected into the bloodstream through an intravenous (IV) line before or during the imaging test and later flushed out in urine. The contrast agent used for primary CNS lymphoma is called gadolinium. You’ll have multiple MRI tests throughout diagnosis and treatment. An MRI should be done early on if your symptoms suggest a brain tumor. It’s also used right after treatment to see how well the treatment worked. You’ll have more MRIs during follow-up to watch for any recurrence or new growth. CT If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan uses x-rays to take many images of your body from different angles. A computer then combines the pictures to make a 3D image. After imaging After the MRI or CT scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist, an expert in analyzing images of the nervous system. The radiologist will convey the imaging results to your care team. This information helps your team plan what the next steps of your care should be.
1171	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
1172	During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team.
1173	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1174	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
1175	Chapter 3: Bone cancer staging explains how bone cancer is staged and where bone tumors might be found in the body. Chapter 4: Types of treatment gives an overview of the types of different treatment and who might be on your treatment team. Chapter 5: Chondrosarcoma discusses chondrosarcoma treatment. Treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. Chapter 6: Chordoma discusses chordoma treatment. Treatment options include surgery or radiation therapy. Chapter 7: Ewing sarcoma discusses Ewing sarcoma treatment options. Treatment begins with systemic therapy. Chapter 8: Giant cell tumor of bone discusses GCTB treatment options. GCTB is usually not cancer, but needs aggressive treatment to prevent bone damage. Chapter 9: Osteosarcoma discusses osteosarcoma treatment options. Osteosarcoma is the more common type of bone cancer. Treatment is a combination of therapies. Chapter 10: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team.
1176	It sends and receives radio waves. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. An MRI may cause your body to feel warm. If MRI is being used to better see cancer near the rectum, an enema may be needed. Or a gel may be inserted into the rectum beforehand. CT scan CT with contrast is the main imaging test used to determine the extent of colon cancer in the body. CT takes many pictures of the inside of the body using -rays. A computer combines the -rays to make one detailed picture. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colon cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. If you are interested in potentially having children in the future, tell your care team. They will discuss any fertilityrelated risks of your treatment plan with you. Some methods for preserving (keeping) fertility before cancer treatment are described below. Your doctor may refer you for counseling about fertility preservation options. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation.
1177	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
1178	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
1179	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
1180	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
1181	The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis.
1182	This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts. However, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Unlike other cancers of organs, like lung cancer or breast cancer, AML does not have stages. Many cancers spread from the location where they originate, and the extent or severity of cancer is determined by how far it has spread. AML arises from the bone marrow, which is present in nearly all of our bones. Because AML cells arise from multiple bones and flow in the blood all over the body, traditional staging is not useful. Instead, AML testing looks for specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes, which can tell your care team how aggressive your leukemia might be. Possible tests and procedures can be found in Guide Information on possible tests and procedures can be found in this chapter. You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you.
1183	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
1184	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
1185	This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep). Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to which cancer cells most likely spread from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there is more than one sentinel lymph node. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a surgery that removes tissue samples to examine sentinel nodes. The lymph nodes will be checked for cancer cells by a pathologist in a lab. Sometimes people can have an SLNB at the same time as surgery. The results will be used to stage the cancer and plan treatment. To locate the sentinel lymph node(s), your surgeon will inject a radioactive, blue-colored substance into your skin near the tumor. The substance will drain into the sentinel lymph nodes. Your surgeon will identify the sentinel lymph nodes using a device and remove them through a small cut in your skin. This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches.
1186	Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Therefore, becoming pregnant or having one's partner become pregnant during treatment should be avoided. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood.
1187	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1188	What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it. Although no one knows exactly what causes a lymphoma, we do know that lymphomas often start with a genetic abnormality (mutation) in certain lymphocytes. This abnormality causes these lymphocytes to grow out of control (become cancerous). The abnormality occurs on its own. It’s not a mutation that occurs in other cells or organs in your body. And it’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Although primary CNS lymphoma is rare, it could happen to almost anyone. However, some people with certain risk factors have a greater chance. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. For example, having a reduced immune system increases the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause a disease (and just because you have risk factors, it doesn’t mean you'll definitely get the disease). But people with primary CNS lymphoma often have one or more of these risk factors: Having an immunodeficiency disorder, which is an illness that weakens the immune system’s ability to fight infections and diseases.
1189	A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy. In general, to be diagnosed with AML, 20 percent or more myeloblasts must be present in the bone marrow or blood. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 cells are blasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of AML is possible with any number of blasts, particularly if specific gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes are also present. Genetic and biomarker tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely course the cancer will take called a prognosis. Questions to ask What subtype of AML do I have? What does this mean in terms of prognosis and treatment options? Is there a cancer center or hospital nearby that specializes in my subtype of AML? What tests will I have? How often will they be repeated? h Will my insurance pay for these tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps?
1190	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
1191	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
1192	Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia.
1193	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1194	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
1195	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
1196	Inherited cancer risk Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk for different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer or other features, your doctor might suggest genetic testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Germline testing may be more appropriate for people who have: Already had cancer A close relative with bladder cancer Age below 50 Cancer of the upper urinary tract High grade (fast growing) cancer Lynch syndrome or a family member with Lynch syndrome If you have one or more of these factors, you should ask about genetic counseling. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases and can help you decide whether to have germline testing. The test is done using a sample of your blood, saliva, urine, or tumor tissue. A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good.
1197	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
1198	Having a hereditary mutation doesn’t mean you’ll automatically get cancer. It means your chances for developing certain cancers is higher. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Inherited mutations in genes like BRCA1 or BRCA2 are also related to breast cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, and skin cancer (melanoma). Inherited mutations in MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 are related to colorectal cancer, uterine cancer, and other cancers in addition to prostate cancer. If an inherited cancer risk gene is suspected based on your family’s or your own health history, you should ask about genetic testing. Your health care provider can talk to you about testing or refer you to a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor is an expert who has special training in genetic diseases. A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and also help you interpret the results of these tests.
1199	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
1200	The prostate gland makes a fluid that nourishes and helps transmit sperm. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis. Urethra: A tube that carries urine from the bladder and out of the body. The prostate surrounds the urethra just beneath the bladder. Seminal vesicles: Two glands that make and store another part of the fluid that becomes semen. The seminal vesicles are located above the prostate and behind the bladder. Bladder: An organ that holds urine. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers.
1201	It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease.
1202	Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL.
1203	Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis. Advanced-stage prostate cancer is usually a life-long disease. Treatment can slow it down, reduce its symptoms, and help people live longer. 2 Tests for advanced prostate cancer Common prostate tests General health history Diagnostic tests Genetic tests Tumor staging What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with prostate cancer, you may need multiple tests and scans to find out if you have it and whether it has spread. These tests and scans will help your team make the best plan to treat your prostate cancer. Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter describes what tests you might have and what to expect during testing. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here.
1204	Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. For weeks my bra had been feeling uncomfortably tight. I tried to ignore it but then felt sharp, shooting pains and the skin looked 'funny.' It took multiple office visits and finally to a surgeon to learn I had inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). a nurse and didn't know you could have breast cancer without a lump." 2 Testing for IBC 20 21 21 23 24 25 Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Distress screening Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram.
1205	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
1206	These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. However, it’s important to know that a biopsy doesn’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop an abnormal change (mutation). A mutation is when something is different in your genes than in most other people’s genes. Sometimes an abnormal change can cause a gene to make the wrong type of protein or make no protein at all. This abnormality could affect the cell, which may in turn cause a disease such as cancer. Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells.
1207	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
1208	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
1209	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
1210	What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk.
1211	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
1212	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1213	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
1214	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
1215	National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Key points Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. IMRT is an advanced radiation technique recommended for treating anal cancer. It can limit radiation exposure to areas near the tumor, such as the genitals, small intestine and large intestine, bladder, and skin. Chemotherapy is the use of medicines that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. It is a type of systemic therapy. Recommended chemotherapy regimens for use with radiation to treat anal cancer include mitomycin and capecitabine, mitomycin and 5-FU, and 5-FU and cisplatin. Local excision instead of chemoradiation may be an option for some slow-growing stage I and II perianal cancers. A follow-up exam with DRE is recommended 8 to 12 weeks after completing chemoradiation to check the results of treatment. Surveillance during remission includes DRE and lymph node exams every 3 to 6 months for 5 years and anoscopy every 6 to 12 months for 3 years. Yearly imaging for 3 years is also recommended for stage II and III anal cancers.
1216	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
1217	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1218	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies.
1219	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
1220	For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a core sample. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. Genetic cancer risk testing Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva from spitting into a cup or a cheek swab. The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your birth parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, blood relatives might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. Biomarker testing A sample from your biopsy will undergo lab tests to look for specific DNA mutations/ alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Biomarker testing is performed on a case-by-case basis and may increase the time it takes for biopsy results. Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing.
1221	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
1222	This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer may spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. This book is all about advanced-stage prostate cancer. Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby areas such as lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads beyond the prostate to other parts of the body is called distant metastatic prostate cancer or simply metastatic prostate cancer. How does prostate cancer spread? Cancer cells use the bloodstream like a highway to travel to distant areas in the body. Cancer cells can also spread through the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is a network of organs and vessels that fights infections and circulates a clear fluid called lymph throughout the body. A normal and important part of the lymphatic system are the lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are small, disease-fighting clusters that filter lymph fluid to remove germs. Lymph vessels and nodes are found everywhere in the body. Some patients have advanced-stage prostate cancer when they’re first diagnosed.
1223	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
1224	Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). Bone tumors often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly (the metaphysis). This book will discuss the following: Chondrosarcoma – starts in the cells that form cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones to form a smooth surface that makes a joint. Also, cartilage gives structure to the nose, ears, larynx, and other parts of the body. Chordoma – starts in notochordal cells that form the spine and vertebrae. Chordomas are usually found in the lower spinal column (sacrum) or at the base of the skull. Ewing sarcoma – starts in the bone marrow and commonly occurs in the diaphysis of long bones or flat bones like the pelvis or scapula (shoulder blade). Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) – is an overgrowth of cells found in the part of the bone called the metaphysis and extends into the area of the bone that widens to form a joint (epiphysis).
1225	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
1226	It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer Mouth or oral cancer can develop in the lips (mucosal lip), the lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa), the front two-thirds of the tongue, the upper and lower gums (gingiva), the floor of the mouth under the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate), and the small area behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone). 2 Testing for mouth cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your cancer stage treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider.
1227	Chemotherapy Systemic therapy is drug therapy that works throughout the body. It is used before surgery to shrink the tumor or reduce the amount of cancer (called cancer burden). Preoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given before surgery. It is also called neoadjuvant therapy. Postoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given after surgery. It is also called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and some normal cells. More than one chemotherapy may be used to treat inflammatory breast cancer. When only one drug is used, it’s called a single agent. A combination or multi-agent regimen is the use of two or more chemotherapy drugs. Warnings about supplements and drug interactions You might be asked to stop taking or avoid certain herbal supplements when on a systemic therapy. Some supplements can affect the ability of a drug to do its job. This is called a drug interaction. It is critical to speak with your care team about any supplements you may be taking. Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job.
1228	But several factors are linked to a higher risk of prostate cancer. These are called risk factors. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting cancer. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause prostate cancer, but people with prostate cancer usually have one or more of these risk factors: Age The biggest risk factor for prostate cancer is age. Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above. Your chances of getting prostate cancer increase as you become older. Family history Your family health history is information about the diseases and health conditions in your family. A family history reflects a pattern of certain diseases among family members. Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is a gland located in the pelvis—the area between your hips. The prostate is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a fluid that nourishes and helps transmit sperm. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation.
1229	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
1230	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
1231	The pattern that accounts for the secondlargest area is given the second number. Add these two numbers together and you get a Gleason score. For example: pattern pattern Gleason score of 7 A Gleason score represents how much your biopsy sample looks like normal prostate tissue. It also estimates how aggressive your prostate cancer is—how quickly it might grow and whether it will spread. A higher Gleason score means the cancer is more likely to grow and spread quickly than a cancer with a lower Gleason score. Gleason scores range from 6 to 10, where 6 is the lowest score. A Gleason score of 7 is intermediate-grade, and 8 to 10 is high-grade. This can be confusing because 6 seems like it would be a medium score, not a low score. So to make Gleason scores simpler to use, they can be organized into Grade Groups. Grade Groups A Grade Group is a way to interpret a Gleason score. There are five Grade Groups, numbered 1 to The higher the Grade Group, the more aggressive the cancer. So cancer with a Gleason score of 6 is assigned as Grade Group 1 to show that it is the lowest score.
1232	Gliomas can be challenging to treat, but treatment is improving. What is a glioma? A glioma is a type of tumor that grows in the brain. A tumor is an abnormal growth of cells. Gliomas develop from certain brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells (neurons) in the central nervous system (the brain and the spinal cord). Many types of tumors can occur in the central nervous system. Only those that start as glial cells become gliomas. Gliomas are the most common type of malignant (cancerous) brain tumor in adults. Gliomas can happen at any age but occur more often in adults than in children. Gliomas start in the brain or sometimes the spinal cord. But they rarely spread to another area of the body. What makes gliomas so complicated is that they invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. So gliomas can be very difficult to treat without harming the healthy parts of the brain. Normal cells vs. cancer cells Normal cells follow the body’s rules. Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules.
1233	Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years. But when they do, they usually come back as a highergrade glioma. Grade 3 tumor cells don’t look much like normal cells. They quickly increase in number and invade nearby tissue. All high-grade tumors (grades 3 and 4) require additional therapy—like radiation and chemotherapy—after surgery. Grade 4 tumor cells look very abnormal. These tumors grow and spread very quickly. Glioblastomas are the most common grade 4 gliomas. Biomarkers The neuropathologist also tests the tissue sample for specific biomarkers. Biomarker tests provide more details about the glioma tumor. A biomarker is something found in the body that’s a sign of a condition, disease, or abnormality. In cancer care, biomarker testing looks for changes in genes, proteins, and other markers. Many of these changes are mutations. A mutation is an abnormal change in your DNA—your body’s genetic instructions. A mutation can disrupt how some cells behave, which can cause diseases like cancer. Biomarker testing can improve the accuracy of your diagnosis as well as fine-tune your treatment options.
1234	Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms.
1235	Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms.
1236	Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms.
1237	You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. Key points h Gliomas develop from brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord. Gliomas can disrupt the brain’s ability to function properly. Gliomas can be difficult to treat because they frequently invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. What causes gliomas is unknown. What is known is that gliomas often start with an abnormality (mutation) that makes glial cells grow out of control. The 3 most common types of glioma tumors are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. h Several different tests and procedures are usually needed to diagnose a glioma. Gliomas can be treated but usually return at some point. 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different.” 2 Glioma testing Health and symptom Imaging Biopsy Lab testing Your tumor type What’s next?
1238	Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells. Glioblastomas come from precursor cells that develop into cells like astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Glioblastomas are the most destructive and dangerous type of glioma tumor. Besides tumor type, gliomas are also categorized by grade. The grade indicates how fast the tumor is likely to grow. A low-grade glioma usually grows slowly while a high-grade glioma often grows rapidly. Although it helps to put gliomas into categories, it’s important to note that each glioma has its own molecular characteristics and behavior. That also means that each person’s glioma is unique. So your progress and experience will be unique to you. Gliomas often occur in the upper part of the brain where they can disrupt important brain functions. Few gliomas in adults have distinct and welldefined edges like the one in this illustration. Most gliomas blend deeply into normal brain tissue and have vague borders. This makes them very difficult to remove entirely. When the tumor is removed, some tumor cells must be left behind to avoid damaging nearby brain tissue. How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms.
1239	What causes pancreatic cancer? What are the stages of pancreatic cancer? What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? Key points Pancreatic cancer is one of the most common cancers. It is a challenging cancer to treat, but treatment is improving. Experts are studying the best ways to treat pancreatic cancer and are developing new treatments. Read this chapter to learn the answers to some common questions about pancreatic cancer. What is pancreatic cancer? Pancreatic cancer starts in a large gland called the pancreas. The pancreas is part of the digestive system. It makes enzymes that break down proteins, fats, sugars, and starches in food. It also makes hormones called insulin and glucagon that control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer affects cell growth. Pancreatic cancer cells make many new cancer cells and do not die when they should. The overgrowth of pancreatic cancer cells becomes a mass called a tumor. Pancreatic cancer cells also don’t stay in place and may grow into nearby body tissue. They may break away from a tumor, spread to other areas, and form more tumors. There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells.
1240	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help identify cancer in primary sites, lymph nodes, and/or distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel.
1241	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1242	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
1243	For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor.
1244	Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone.
1245	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
1246	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
1247	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
1248	The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer. PSA density also accounts for those with small and very small prostates, who could have prostate cancer even with low PSAs. Grade Group If cancer cells are found in your biopsy samples, further testing can identify your cancer risk. Results from these tests may indicate that the cancer will grow and spread quickly, for example. Or the results may suggest that the cancer will grow very slowly and not spread outside of the prostate at all. This information helps plan the best treatment for your type of cancer. By looking at your biopsy samples, the pathologist will identify certain cancer cell patterns (called Gleason patterns), which are used to calculate your Gleason score, which translates to your Grade Group, which estimates your risk. This can be confusing at first (Gleason patterns? Gleason score? Grade Group?) but it’s not all that complicated in the end. Read on.
1249	Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread.
1250	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
1251	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
1252	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
1253	Chemotherapy Systemic therapy is drug therapy that works throughout the body. It is used before surgery to shrink the tumor or reduce the amount of cancer (called cancer burden). Preoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given before surgery. It is also called neoadjuvant therapy. Postoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given after surgery. It is also called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and some normal cells. More than one chemotherapy may be used to treat inflammatory breast cancer. When only one drug is used, it’s called a single agent. A combination or multi-agent regimen is the use of two or more chemotherapy drugs. Warnings about supplements and drug interactions You might be asked to stop taking or avoid certain herbal supplements when on a systemic therapy. Some supplements can affect the ability of a drug to do its job. This is called a drug interaction. It is critical to speak with your care team about any supplements you may be taking. Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job.
1254	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
1255	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
1256	Yearly imaging for 3 years is also recommended for stage II and III anal cancers. APR surgery to remove the anus may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment. It involves creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. If cancer returns to lymph nodes in the groin (but not to the anal area) and you had radiation as part of initial treatment, a groin dissection and/or chemotherapy is recommended. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with chemotherapy. If the cancer does not respond or gets worse, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is recommended if you are eligible. Clinical trials provide access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the U.S. 3 Survivorship 32 Your primary care doctor 32 Late and long-term side effects 36 Healthy habits 37 More information 3 Survivorship Survivorship focuses on the physical, emotional, and financial issues unique to cancer survivors. Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship.
1257	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
1258	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
1259	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
1260	In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection.
1261	This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Talk to your care team and make your wishes known. Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might also be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve major vessels or other normal critical structures making it unsafe to remove. Mouth cancer stages The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the mouth including mucosa of the lip. These are tumors that start in the surface (epithelium), which lines the inside of the mouth. The epithelial layer is made up of squamous cells. See Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). A golf ball is 4 cm and a pea is 1 cm .
1262	In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection.
1263	Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on invasive breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast and then spreads into surrounding tissue. Invasive breast cancer has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes. It is possible to have MBC when axillary lymph nodes do not have cancer.
1264	Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. Sometimes, the sample is taken straight to the neuropathologist while you’re still in the operating room. The neuropathologist will perform an analysis right away and send the results back to the neurosurgeon. The results will say whether the tumor is malignant (cancerous) or benign (not cancerous). The results may also include the preliminary diagnosis, including the type and grade of the glioma. Knowing the preliminary diagnosis during your surgery helps the neurosurgeon to decide how much of the tumor to remove. The neuropathologist will also do molecular (genetic) testing, which indicates the type and growth rate of your glioma and other specific features. All this information will help your treatment team figure out the best treatment plan for you. If your hospital or medical center doesn’t have a neuropathologist, you can ask to have your biopsy sent to one. Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose a glioma tumor. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor.
1265	Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy.
1266	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
1267	Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
1268	A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others.
1269	A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others.
1270	They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) and high-grade endometrioid carcinoma are the most common types of ovarian tumors. Less common ovarian cancers can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Treating ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. Gynecologic oncologists and medical oncologists often work together to plan your treatment. 2 Testing for ovarian cancer Abdominal and pelvic exam Imaging tests Biopsy Family history and genetic testing Nutritional and digestive tract health Blood tests Biomarker testing Key points This chapter describes the testing used to learn more about suspected ovarian cancer, including whether surgery is possible. Ovarian cancer can cause changes in the body that you can feel or notice. But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread.
1271	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
1272	Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. If there is a history of H. pylori (bacteria) infection and/or treatment, it is important to let the medical team know. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you.
1273	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1274	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
1275	Capecitabine can cause a side effect known as hand-foot syndrome. Symptoms include redness, swelling, and pain on the palms of the hands, bottoms of feet, or both. Sometimes blisters appear. Your dose of capecitabine may be changed at the earliest signs of hand-foot syndrome. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 23 for next steps. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better: NCCN.org/patients/feedback Perianal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III perianal cancer. Stages I through III are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Like anal canal cancer, most perianal cancers are treated with chemoradiation. However, local excision (surgery) may be an option for some early-stage, low-risk perianal cancers. Local excision involves removing only the tumor and a small area of surrounding tissue. Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers.
1276	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
1277	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
1278	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
1279	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
1280	Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment.
1281	The cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. This can end up harming the body. Cancer cells can survive much longer than normal cells do. They can replace many normal cells and cause organs to stop working well. Cancer cells can also spread outside the prostate to other areas of the body. The prostate gland is an important part of the male reproductive system. It’s located in the pelvis just below the bladder and is typically about the size of a pingpong ball. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? A symptom is a feeling or problem that can indicate a disease or condition. Prostate cancer often grows slowly and shows no symptoms for a long time. You don’t have to have symptoms to have prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, may include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH).
1282	A tumor micrometastasis is a very small collection of cancerous cells smaller than 1 mm. It might be written as T1mi. Ipsilateral means on the same side of the body. T1 Tumor is 2 cm or less T2 Tumor is 1 cm to 5 cm T3 Tumor is more than 5 cm T4 Tumor is of any size and has invaded nearby structures such as the chest wall and skin of the breast • T4d Tumor is inflammatory carcinoma (inflammatory breast cancer) Regional lymph node Lymph, a clear fluid containing cells that help fight infections and other diseases, drains through channels into lymphatic vessels. From here, lymph drains into lymph nodes. There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor in the breast. If breast cancer spreads, it often goes first to nearby lymph nodes under the arm. It can also sometimes spread to lymph nodes near the collarbone or near the breastbone. Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer.
1283	It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis. Basal cells – Found in the lower part of the epidermis, basal cells constantly divide to form new cells that replace the squamous cells on the skin’s surface. Melanocytes – Melanocytes are cells located in the lower part of the epidermis that produce melanin. Melanin is responsible for our hair, skin, and eye color. It also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. This book is only about basal cell skin cancer. For more information on squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes.
1284	Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility. It can happen to people of any gender. You may receive a referral to a fertility specialist. A fertility specialist is an expert in helping people have babies. They can explain how you may be able to have a baby during or after treatment. Collecting and freezing sperm or eggs is a common method. More information on fertility preservation can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cancer treatment can impact one's ability to have children. Before starting treatment, talk with a fertility counselor to learn what your options are for fertility preservation. What’s a prognosis? Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease based on tests. Prognosis is used to predict how the cancer will turn out. Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know.
1285	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
1286	It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone. This is called metastatic liver cancer. Inside the liver are blood and lymphatic vessels. Cancer can spread from the liver through the blood and lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is made up of a network of vessels that carry a clear fluid called lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food, and it has white blood cells that fight germs. Lymph nodes filter lymph and remove the germs. Although possible, HCC does not commonly spread to nearby lymph nodes. Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing liver cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing liver cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, heart, liver, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs).
1287	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
1288	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
1289	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1290	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1291	Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
1292	PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment.
1293	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
1294	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
1295	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1296	Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have. Treatment Surgery is recommended to treat squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Surgery for regional CSCC involves excision (removal) of the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Although surgery is preferred, it may not be an option for one or more reasons. In this case, see If surgery is not an option below for information. If surgery is very risky or might not completely remove your cancer, your doctor may suggest immunotherapy with cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo) first. It may shrink the tumor and make surgery less risky. Head and neck tumors Lymph nodes may be removed from one or both sides of the neck during surgery for head and neck tumors. The extent of surgery depends on the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. After surgery, radiation therapy is often given to decrease the chance of the tumor returning. Systemic therapy is sometimes used in addition to radiation therapy after surgery.
1297	Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
1298	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
1299	It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence.
1300	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
1301	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
1302	APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer. This type of surgery is also used for some rectal cancers. In addition to the anus, APR typically involves removing the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and the fatty tissue surrounding the rectum. Lymph nodes in the groin will also be removed during surgery if any are known to have cancer. This is known as a groin dissection. Radiation treatment for anal cancer weakens and damages the perineum, which can interfere with healing after APR. In some cases, closing the wound requires taking tissue from another area of the body. This is known as muscle flap reconstruction. It can improve healing of the perineum and reduce complications after surgery. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominis, along with skin, fat, and blood vessels, is often used for reconstruction. If APR is planned, ask your doctor about muscle flap reconstruction. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment.
1303	Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. A urologic oncologist is a surgeon who diagnoses cancers of the urinary tract and the male reproductive organs, and treats the cancer using surgery and intravesical therapy. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic therapies such as chemotherapy and immunotherapy. A medical oncologist will often coordinate your care with other team members. If not, ask who will coordinate your care. A radiation oncologist prescribes and plans radiation therapy to treat cancer. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. A pharmacist prepares chemotherapy and other medicines, and can offer treatment advice. A diagnostic radiologist reads the results of x-rays and other imaging tests. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you don’t feel pain during surgery or procedures. Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care.
1304	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
1305	Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared with white males. Prostate cancer is diagnosed less often in Hispanic and Asian males than in white and Black males. Several things may contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Specialists are researching each of these areas. In light of these issues, Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier than what’s recommended for other males. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive is also used to describe therapy that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to prevent prostate cancer or to cause prostate cancer. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer.
1306	Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen.
1307	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
1308	Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your Be prepared to have many blood tests. refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. Include in your contact list information on the exact type of cancer, as well as any treatment and the date it started. For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you.
1309	Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign of bone tumors, liver disorders, or pregnancy. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. RBCs carry oxygen throughout your body, WBCs fight infection, and PLTs control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. A CMP will look for higher than normal calcium levels in your blood called hypercalcemia. Calcium is needed for healthy teeth, bones, and other body tissues. Bone damage from cancer can cause your bones to release calcium into the bloodstream, which can lead to illness and other health issues. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1310	Your doctor will want to know if you have enough red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells to fight infection, and platelets to control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures important chemicals, proteins, and other substances in your blood. Levels that are too high or low could be a sign of a health problem in areas like the kidneys or liver. Who’s on your multidisciplinary care team? Treating bladder cancer takes a team approach. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your cancer treatment, while others will be there for parts of it. Your team should communicate and work together to bring the best knowledge from each specialty. This is called multidisciplinary care. Depending on your diagnosis, your multidisciplinary team may include a dozen or more specialists and care providers: Your primary care doctor handles medical care not related to your cancer. Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs.
1311	A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well.
1312	Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you keep track your appointments and communicate with your care team. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take.
1313	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
1314	Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment.
1315	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1316	You will get through this. It might seem hard at times toward the end of treatment and the following weeks and months while you recover, but it will pass. I tried to just stay focused on the goal of getting through to the other side to whatever comes next. – Thom Anal cancer survivor Ostomy You can still lead an active lifestyle with an ostomy. However, it is a good idea to consult with an ostomy professional before any vigorous or high-intensity physical activity. Healthy habits Monitoring for the return of anal cancer is important after finishing treatment. But, it is also important to keep up with other aspects of your health. Steps you can take to help prevent other health issues and to improve your quality of life are described next. Get screened for other types of cancer, such as breast, cervical, colorectal, or prostate cancer. Your primary care doctor should tell you what cancer screening tests you should have based on your sex, age, and risk level. Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight.
1317	Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive can also be used to describe therapy that may be stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier and perhaps more often than what’s recommended for other males. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to cause prostate cancer or to prevent it. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Smoking and obesity also increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. On the other hand, those who eat more fruits and vegetables have a lower risk of developing advanced prostate cancer. Exercise and maintaining a healthy weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate.
1318	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
1319	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, which are found in the intestines, mouth, and blood. As a result, common side effects include: Loss of appetite Nausea Vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) Cisplatin can damage the kidneys. People whose kidneys do not work well may not be able to have cisplatin. An alternative chemotherapy drug may be used. Cisplatin can also cause ringing in the ears (tinnitus) or hearing problems or loss. Ask your treatment team for a list of common and rare side effects of each systemic therapy you are receiving. There are ways to prevent or alleviate some of these effects. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
1320	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
1321	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
1322	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma Biopsy and lab testing Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging tests Heart and lung tests Other testing and care Key points Questions to ask This chapter explains how Hodgkin lymphoma is identified (diagnosed). Other testing and care you may have before treatment is described. Biopsy and lab testing The best way to diagnose Hodgkin lymphoma is to have 1 or more whole lymph nodes removed and tested. This is called an excisional lymph node biopsy. While an excisional biopsy is preferred, a core needle biopsy may be done in some cases. In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node.
1323	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
1324	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
1325	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
1326	Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job. Antacids, heart or blood pressure medicine, and antidepressants are just some of the medicines that might interact with a systemic therapy. Therefore, it is very important to tell your care team about any medicines, vitamins, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, herbals, or supplements you are taking. Bring a list with you to every visit. Some chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are infused into a vein or injected under the skin with a needle. Other chemotherapy drugs may be given as a pill that is swallowed. Some examples of chemotherapy drugs include: h Doxorubicin (Adriamcyin), doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil), and epirubicin (Ellence) are anthracyclines. Docetaxel, paclitaxel, and albumin-bound paclitaxel are taxanes. Capecitabine (Xeloda), fluorouracil, gemcitabine (Gemzar, Infugem), and methotrexate are antimetabolites. Most chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary.
1327	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
1328	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
1329	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
1330	Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures. It is a type of ultrasound. For this test, small patches will be placed on your chest to track your heartbeat. Next, a wand with gel on its tip will be slid across part of your bare chest. A picture of your beating heart will be seen on a screen. The pictures will be recorded for future viewing. An echocardiogram shows the structure (valves and muscle thickness) and function of your heart (or ejection fraction). Ejection fraction is the amount of blood pumped out of the left side of your heart every time it beats. If the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart is lower than normal, this indicates decreased heart function. 66 It is important to understand what you are going through. If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said.
1331	h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. h Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a slowgrowing (indolent) lymphoma that typically forms tumors in the lymph nodes. However, FL can be found in other parts of the body. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes form clusters (follicles) in the germinal centers of lymph nodes. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. 2 Testing for FL Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Performance status Blood tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for FL biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Key points Accurate testing is essential to diagnose and treat follicular lymphoma (FL). This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Follicular lymphoma (FL) might be found because of swollen lymph nodes or an enlarged spleen. Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans.
1332	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
1333	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
1334	An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Your team might include the following doctors: A hematologist or hematologic oncologist is a medical expert in blood diseases and blood cancers and treats these conditions. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic (drug) therapy. A pathologist or hematopathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body. Types include chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important.
1335	How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers. You may be able to view the pathology report using an online patient portal, or you could ask for a copy. The report is used to plan your treatment. Your oncologist will review the results with you. Take notes and ask questions. What tests are needed for starting treatment? The tests used to provide care are listed in Guide 1 and are described next. Health history Expect your care team to review your health in detail. This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health.
1336	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
1337	An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Your team might include the following doctors: A hematologist or hematologic oncologist is a medical expert in blood diseases and blood cancers and treats these conditions. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic (drug) therapy. A pathologist or hematopathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body. Types include chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important.
1338	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
1339	Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing. This can help your providers know how to manage your symptoms better. Stem cell rescue A stem cell is a basic cell that can develop into any kind of cell. Stem cells that become blood cells are called hematopoietic stem cells. Hematopoietic means “blood-forming.” Blood-forming stem cells are made in the bone marrow. But cancer and its treatment can damage and destroy cells in the bone marrow. When hematopoietic stem cells are damaged, they may not supply all the blood cells that the body needs. A stem cell rescue is a way to jumpstart the bone marrow to make more healthy blood cells. Also called a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, stem cell rescue uses your own blood-forming stem cells to regrow your bone marrow. A stem cell rescue has 3 key steps: h Stem cell removal – First, some of your healthy stem cells will be removed from your blood or bone marrow. You may need a few visits to collect enough stem cells. These collected stem cells are then frozen and stored for later.
1340	Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing. This can help your providers know how to manage your symptoms better. Stem cell rescue A stem cell is a basic cell that can develop into any kind of cell. Stem cells that become blood cells are called hematopoietic stem cells. Hematopoietic means “blood-forming.” Blood-forming stem cells are made in the bone marrow. But cancer and its treatment can damage and destroy cells in the bone marrow. When hematopoietic stem cells are damaged, they may not supply all the blood cells that the body needs. A stem cell rescue is a way to jumpstart the bone marrow to make more healthy blood cells. Also called a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, stem cell rescue uses your own blood-forming stem cells to regrow your bone marrow. A stem cell rescue has 3 key steps: h Stem cell removal – First, some of your healthy stem cells will be removed from your blood or bone marrow. You may need a few visits to collect enough stem cells. These collected stem cells are then frozen and stored for later.
1341	That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned. The most common kind of bladder cancer starts in the urothelial cells, which are stretchy cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells also form the inner layer in the rest of the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys, the ureters, and the urethra. Cancer of the urothelium can start in these areas instead of the bladder, although it’s less common. Other (non-urothelial) types of bladder cancer are much less common. These include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. How is bladder cancer found? Bladder cancer is usually found when a person has symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may signal a disease or condition. The most common symptom of bladder cancer, and the one that usually appears first, is having blood in your urine (hematuria). How does blood get into urine? Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red.
1342	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1343	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1344	Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored. They may be commonly attributed to hemorrhoids. Although they may be embarrassing to talk about, it is important to be evaluated by a health care professional. Most commonly, people with these symptoms reach out to their primary care physician (PCP), gynecologist, or gastroenterologist. This is an important first step. However, because anal cancer is fairly rare, certain specialists are best qualified to evaluate you. Such specialists include colorectal surgeons and health care providers trained to conduct a test called high-resolution anoscopy (HRA). HRA typically takes place after a digital rectal exam (DRE) is performed. Digital rectal exam The digital rectal exam (DRE) is an important exam for diagnosis, staging, and follow-up. There is nothing high-tech about a DRE. Digit is another word for finger. In a DRE, your doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into your anus and rectum. This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas.
1345	The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum). The liver and nearby organs The gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, and small intestine are found near the liver. Bile Liver cells make bile. Bile is a yellow or green fluid made up of cholesterol, bilirubin, salts such as potassium and sodium, water, and other elements found in the body. It flows into small channels that drain into thin tubes called ducts. These ducts form larger and larger channels that flow into the left and right hepatic ducts. The left and right hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct joins with the cystic duct that connects to the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The common bile duct is joined by the pancreatic duct just before it enters the small intestine. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ found under the liver. It is sometimes described as sac-like because it holds bile from the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food.
1346	G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade. Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers. GX means the grade can’t be determined, followed by G1, G2, and GWell differentiated (G1) means the cancer cells look like normal cells. Poorly differentiated (G3) means the cancer cells look very different compared to normal cells. GX – Grade cannot be determined G1 – Well differentiated (low grade) G2 – Moderately differentiated (high grade) G3 – Poorly differentiated (high grade) Numbered stages Number stages range from stage 1 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. The stage of a bone cancer is determined by combining the T, N, M, and G scores. These stages are written as stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Not all bone cancers are described using numbered stages. See Guide Liver cancer basics The liver Liver cancer How liver cancer spreads Risk factors Hepatitis Liver cancer screening Key points The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage.
1347	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
1348	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
1349	Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme. A high level of LDH can be a sign of cell damage caused by cancer or other health problems. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) blood test is needed for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized care and treatment with antiretroviral therapy in addition to cancer treatment. Hepatitis B testing will be necessary if you’re having immunotherapy treatment and you’ve had this virus before (or you’re at risk of getting it). Immunotherapy can “reawaken” the hepatitis B virus and cause illness that interferes with treatment. Bone marrow biopsy Most bones have a spongy center called marrow. The marrow is where new blood cells are made. It’s uncommon to find cancer cells in the bone marrow of people diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. But if imaging suggests the possibility of lymphoma in the bones, your care team may recommend a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed.
1350	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
1351	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1352	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
1353	It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease.
1354	Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food. The hepatobiliary system The liver is part of the hepatobiliary system. “Hepato” means liver and “biliary” refers to the gallbladder and bile ducts. Together, they form the hepatobiliary system. The hepatobiliary system makes bile and is a part of the digestive system. The digestive system takes in food, breaks it down, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Some doctors consider the pancreas to be a part of this system. Liver blood supply Blood enters the liver through the hepatic artery and portal vein. Blood exits the liver through the hepatic vein. Credit: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/ File:Diagramshowingthetwolobesoftheliver anditsbloodsupplyCRUKsvg Liver cancer Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. For example, cancer can start in the intestines (colon) and spread to the liver. This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
1355	This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There is a subtype of HCC called fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHC). FLHC affects very few people and usually occurs at a younger age. The second most common type of primary liver cancer in adults is called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which is a cancer of the bile ducts. Other primary liver cancers in adults include rare types of sarcoma that start in the blood vessel cells of the liver. Another rare type is made of both hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. This is called a mixed-type tumor. More information on gallbladder and bile duct tumors is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. In the following pages, this patient guideline will focus on the most common type of liver cancer, HCC, and its treatment. How liver cancer spreads Liver cancer can spread in many ways. It can spread directly through the liver. It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone.
1356	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
1357	Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy.
1358	Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy.
1359	Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy.
1360	Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. The number of treatment days per cycle and the total number of cycles given also vary. Myeloid growth factors Certain chemotherapies can reduce the cells that fight infection. Treatments with myeloid growth factors (MGFs) can help increase the number of white blood cells and prevent infections. More information on myeloid growth factors, can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Anemia and Neutropenia, at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. HER2-targeted therapy HER2 is a protein involved in normal cell growth. There might be higher amounts of HER2 in your breast cancer. If this is the case, it is called HER2-positive breast cancer. HER2-targeted therapy is drug therapy that treats HER2 breast cancer. Most often, HER2-targeted therapy is given with chemotherapy. However, it might be used alone or in combination with endocrine therapy. HER2-targeted therapies include: HER2 antibodies prevent growth signals from HER2 from outside the cell. They also increase the attack of immune cells on cancer cells. HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy.
1361	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
1362	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
1363	When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive . You might hear it called HER2 overexpression or amplification. There are 2 tests for HER2: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measures receptors. If the IHC score is , the cancer is . If the score is 0 or 1, it is considered HER2-. If the score is , further testing is needed. In situ hybridization (ISH) counts the number of copies of the HER2 gene. This test is done mainly when the IHC score is unclear. HER2 testing should be done on all new tumors. A tumor biopsy sample will be used. You might have more than one HER2 test. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. These cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC can find estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptors in breast cancer cells. A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell.
1364	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1365	Keep copies of your pathology reports. The pathology report might include a lot of abbreviations such as pN0(mol+), ypT2, or cNAsk your care team to explain what they mean. 4 Treating IBC Care team 39 Immunotherapy Treatment overview 40 Endocrine therapy Mastectomy 42 Bone-strengthening therapy Radiation therapy 43 Clinical trials Chemotherapy 45 Supportive care Myeloid growth factors 46 Side effects HER2-targeted therapy 49 Key points Inhibitors This chapter provides an overview of treatment options and what to expect. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Care team Treating breast cancer takes a team approach. Treatment decisions should involve a multidisciplinary team (MDT). An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
1366	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1367	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1368	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
1369	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
1370	The tissue is tested in a lab to look for cancer cells. chance or environmental factors later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are hereditary gene testing and tumor testing: Hereditary gene testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Your siblings or other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your health care provider might suggest genetic testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. This is also called germline testing. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for inherited (germline) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, this testing typically looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others. Having a hereditary mutation doesn’t mean you’ll automatically get cancer. It means your chances for developing certain cancers is higher.
1371	This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2). Everyone has BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. When working properly, they are helpful and repair damaged cells. But mutations in these genes increase the risk of developing ovarian, breast, and some other cancers. Another cause of hereditary ovarian cancer is Lynch syndrome. Lynch syndrome is the most common cause of hereditary colon and uterine cancers but can also cause ovarian and other cancers. Ovarian cancer associated with a BRCA mutation or Lynch syndrome usually starts at a younger age than non-hereditary ovarian cancer. Using your age, health history, and family history, your doctor will assess how likely you are to have hereditary ovarian cancer. Genetic testing can tell if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. It is recommended for everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer. If initial treatment works well, BRCA status (whether you have a BRCA mutation) plays an important role in guiding decisions about maintenance therapy.
1372	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
1373	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
1374	The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia). If left untreated, cancer cells grow through the layers of the colon wall, towards the inside of the abdomen. The cancer can then invade structures or organs outside of the colon. 自 Your care team will give you information on: How to prepare for surgery What to expect during and after surgery Recovery Possible short- and long-term side effects of colectomy, including: Leaking from the spot where the colon was reconnected (anastomotic leak) Changes in bowel habits Bowel blocked by scar tissue Organs pushing through tissues or muscles weakened by surgery (hernia) Cancer cells can also break off from the colon tumor and travel through lymph or blood to nearby lymph nodes. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage colon cancer.
1375	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
1376	This expert can speak with you and your family about testing for syndromes related to colon cancer. To be tested, you must provide a sample of blood or saliva. A pathologist tests the sample for gene mutations that cause these syndromes. It is important to meet with a genetic counselor before having any genetic testing. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose colon cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. Complete blood count Cancer and other health problems can cause low or high blood cell counts. A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help the body to fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. Chemistry profile Also known as a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), this group of tests provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. The level of CEA is often higher than normal in people with colon cancer, especially if the cancer has spread to other organs.
1377	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
1378	Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer. Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Key points The pancreas is a gland that helps digest food and control blood sugar. h Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the ducts of the pancreas and are the focus of this book. h Some families share genes that increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. There are five stages of pancreatic cancer that range from stage 0 to stage Your cancer care team will make a treatment plan that is specific to you. Talk with your team about options for treatment and supportive care. Advocate for yourself Take steps to get the best care for you. Here are 3 ways to advocate for yourself: Read this book to learn about pancreatic cancer and its treatment. Use the questions in the back of the book to discuss and decide with your care team which care options are right for you. Choose a multidisciplinary team.
1379	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
1380	This expert can speak with you and your family about testing for syndromes related to colon cancer. To be tested, you must provide a sample of blood or saliva. A pathologist tests the sample for gene mutations that cause these syndromes. It is important to meet with a genetic counselor before having any genetic testing. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose colon cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. Complete blood count Cancer and other health problems can cause low or high blood cell counts. A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help the body to fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. Chemistry profile Also known as a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), this group of tests provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. The level of CEA is often higher than normal in people with colon cancer, especially if the cancer has spread to other organs.
1381	White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. A chemistry profile (also called a comprehensive metabolic panel), is a group of tests that provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. People with colorectal cancer tend to have more than normal. Monitoring CEA can be helpful for some cancers that are only in the rectum. If the level rises, it could signal that the cancer has spread. If the level is high at diagnosis, it could suggest that the cancer has already spread. Monitoring CEA isn't helpful for everyone. Pregnant people and tobacco users may also have more CEA than average in their blood. 66 Write everything down and keep a binder or folder of information. If your loved one wakes up violently ill at midnight, it’s after hours and you need to know who to call. Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency.
1382	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
1383	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1384	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1385	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1386	Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is an enzyme involved in converting food into energy for the body. An LDH test measures the level of this enzyme. A high level of LDH can be a sign of cell damage caused by cancer or other health problems. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) blood test is needed for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized care and treatment with antiretroviral therapy in addition to cancer treatment. Hepatitis B testing will be necessary if you’re having immunotherapy treatment and you’ve had this virus before (or you’re at risk of getting it). Immunotherapy can “reawaken” the hepatitis B virus and cause illness that interferes with treatment. Bone marrow biopsy Most bones have a spongy center called marrow. The marrow is where new blood cells are made. It’s uncommon to find cancer cells in the bone marrow of people diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma. But if imaging suggests the possibility of lymphoma in the bones, your care team may recommend a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed.
1387	Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign cancer has spread to the bone or liver. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells fight infection, and platelets control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures 14 different substances in your blood. It is usually done on the plasma part of your blood. A CMP provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of your liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or that cancer has spread to the liver. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant will be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins.
1388	Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign cancer has spread to the bone or liver. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells fight infection, and platelets control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures 14 different substances in your blood. It is usually done on the plasma part of your blood. A CMP provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of your liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or that cancer has spread to the liver. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant will be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins.
1389	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1390	All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA. While most PSA goes into semen, a little bit ends up in the bloodstream, too. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. Likewise, an increase in PSA after treatment may indicate that the treatment is losing effectiveness. However, age and other factors—such as an enlarged prostate or a urinary tract infection— can also cause high levels of PSA. This means that a PSA test by itself can’t provide a diagnosis of prostate cancer. That’s why a PSA test is often paired with imaging or a digital rectal exam, or both, to decide whether you need a biopsy. PSA level (also called total PSA) is measured in nanograms of PSA per milliliter (ng/mL) of blood. PSA testing Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a protein made inside the prostate gland. If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer.
1391	The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer. PSA density also accounts for those with small and very small prostates, who could have prostate cancer even with low PSAs. Grade Group If cancer cells are found in your biopsy samples, further testing can identify your cancer risk. Results from these tests may indicate that the cancer will grow and spread quickly, for example. Or the results may suggest that the cancer will grow very slowly and not spread outside of the prostate at all. This information helps plan the best treatment for your type of cancer. By looking at your biopsy samples, the pathologist will identify certain cancer cell patterns (called Gleason patterns), which are used to calculate your Gleason score, which translates to your Grade Group, which estimates your risk. This can be confusing at first (Gleason patterns? Gleason score? Grade Group?) but it’s not all that complicated in the end. Read on.
1392	If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. But a high PSA level doesn’t automatically mean you have prostate cancer. Rather, it’s a warning sign that you may need further testing. Digital rectal exam Don’t be fooled by the name—no high-tech electronics are used in a digital rectal exam. For this test, the word “digital” means “finger.” The doctor will insert a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for any signs of cancer. The doctor will wear gloves and use a lubricant to make it easier. A digital rectal exam (also called a prostate exam) may be an awkward and unpleasant form of testing. But it’s the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during a digital rectal exam, though. So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing.
1393	This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Testing begins with prostate cancer screening tests, followed by tests of your general health, and then diagnostic tests, if needed. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Common prostate tests Common prostate cancer tests are used to detect the possibility of prostate cancer in someone who’s undiagnosed. They’re also used to check and monitor prostate cancer in patients who have been diagnosed. Two common tests that look for prostate cancer are the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and digital rectal exam. PSA test This is a blood test that measures the amount of PSA in your bloodstream. PSA is a protein made inside the prostate gland. Its job is to help semen transport sperm. All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA.
1394	For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended. A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery. If the results are good, your next colonoscopy will take place in 3 years. After that, a colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years. Other local excision results Sometimes more treatment is needed after local excision. Reasons you may need more treatment include: Testing of the removed tissues finds high risk features The tumor is larger than expected and has invaded the muscle layer (a T2 tumor) In either case, the preferred next treatment is transabdominal surgery. See the next page for more information on this method. A second option is chemotherapy combined with radiation. Doctors call this chemoradiation. This treatment approach is normally used for locally advanced cancers. See page 23 for more information. If chemoradiation works well, you might have chemotherapy next to kill any lingering cancer cells. Or, you and your doctor may agree to watch and wait. If there are signs of cancer after chemoradiation, transabdominal resection is recommended. Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors.
1395	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
1396	Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body. Your provider will consider the following factors to help decide if RAI may be helpful: The size of the tumor The tumor subtype Whether the cancer invaded lymph or blood vessels Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes The thyroglobulin (Tg) level after surgery Age at diagnosis RAI therapy is usually recommended if any of the following is true: The cancer had spread significantly beyond the thyroid The cancer had invaded blood vessels (applies to follicular and oncocytic tumors) The Tg level was high 6 to 12 weeks after surgery There were large, or more than 5, lymph nodes with cancer The tumor is a differentiated high-grade carcinoma Monitoring and follow-up care Follow-up testing and surveillance are somewhat different after lobectomy versus after total thyroidectomy. After total thyroidectomy Short-term follow-up after total thyroidectomy involves a physical exam and blood tests. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page.
1397	After lobectomy Depending on the extent of cancer observed during surgery and the results of pathologic examination, you may have more surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid. If the cancer is invasive, removing the rest of the thyroid is recommended. For less invasive or minimally invasive cancer, surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid is one option. An alternative is to take a watch-and-wait approach and monitor the cancer. If this option is planned, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-bycase basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. If the nodule removed during lobectomy is benign, monitoring is recommended. In some cases, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level normal. Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body.
1398	Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer.
1399	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
1400	Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing. Your oncologist will score your performance status based on your health history and exam. Blood tests Blood tests can measure blood cells, proteins, and chemicals in the bloodstream. If you haven’t had a blood test recently, you’ll get a complete blood count (CBC) with differential. A CBC measures parts of the blood including counts of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. h A differential counts the most common types of white blood cells in your blood. It also checks if the cell counts are in balance with each other. White blood cell counts are often high at diagnosis of CLL. Other blood counts, such as red blood cells or platelets, may be low. A comprehensive metabolic panel is a screening test for many diseases. It often includes tests for up to 14 chemicals in the blood. Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells.
1401	Stem cell rescue can be an intense procedure. It’s not for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. And it’s only used after you’ve had other treatments or if the lymphoma comes back after earlier treatment (relapse). Your treatment team will consider many factors to decide if a stem cell rescue is right for you. Some of these factors include your fitness level, health status, organ function, cancer stage, previous treatments, other medical conditions, available supportive care, and High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue First, stem cells are removed (harvested) from the patient’s blood or bone marrow. The harvested stem cells are concentrated and frozen for preservation. Next, the patient receives high-dose chemotherapy to destroy any cancer cells in your body. This also kills all the stem cells in the bone marrow. Lastly, the harvested stem cells are returned (transfused) to the patient, where they’ll grow new, healthy blood-forming stem cells in the bone marrow. additional factors—including your goals and preferences. Because the procedure can be risky and the side effects harsh, it may not be a useful option for people who are older or frail. Ask your team about the benefits and risks of having a stem cell rescue.
1402	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help identify cancer in primary sites, lymph nodes, and/or distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel.
1403	Precancer There are abnormal cells on the surface of the anal canal or perianal region. These lesions may develop into cancer. Names for anal precancer include stage 0 anal cancer, anal dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, high-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), and highgrade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL). Treatment may involve close monitoring, electrocautery by an HRA provider, or surgical removal. Stage I In stage I anal cancer, the tumor is 2 cm or smaller. Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage I anal cancer is described as T1, N0, M Stage II Stage II anal cancer is divided into 2 substages, depending on the size of the tumor. Anal tumors larger than 2 cm but not larger than 5 cm are stage IIA. This stage is described as T2, N0, MAnal tumors larger than 5 cm are stage IIB. This stage is described as T3, N0, M Stage II anal cancers have not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage III Stage III anal cancer is divided into 3 substages. There may be cancer in nearby lymph nodes.
1404	Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ). The germ triggers the immune system, causing the immune system to attack cancer cells inside the bladder. Intravesical BCG can lower the chance of recurrence (cancer coming back) or getting worse (invading bladder muscle). Intravesical BCG is commonly used for highgrade bladder cancer that hasn’t invaded the muscle layer. It’s usually started about 3 to 6 weeks after TURBT, to allow the bladder time to heal. It’s given once a week for 6 weeks. You should have a full re-evaluation at 12 weeks after starting treatment. To prevent recurrence, you might be asked to continue having intravesical BCG therapy. This is called maintenance therapy. Maintenance therapy involves three intravesical BCG treatments (given in one week) at 3 months and again at 6 months after TURBT. You may continue to have maintenance therapy every 6 months for up to 3 years, depending on the risk of recurrence. Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder.
1405	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1406	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1407	This finger exam can detect or assess growths or other abnormalities in the anal canal and nearby areas. High-resolution anoscopy (HRA) HRA is a procedure that allows your health care provider to view and examine the anal canal with magnification. After a numbing gel is applied to the anal area, a short, hollow tool (an anoscope) is inserted a few inches into the anus. Next, a liquid called acetic acid is applied to the anal canal tissue. A special magnifying glass called a colposcope is then used to closely examine the tissues of the anal canal. The acetic acid makes abnormal cells appear differently when viewed with the colposcope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen, a sample of tissue is removed and tested. This is called a biopsy. This biopsy sample may provide the diagnosis of anal cancer. If a colposcope is not used for the procedure, it is simply called standard anoscopy. HRA may be more effective than standard anoscopy at identifying anal cancer and anal dysplasia (fast-growing abnormal cells). No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards.
1408	Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on supportive care is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Stage 3 Chemotherapy is recommended after colectomy for all stage 3 colon cancers. Preferred regimens include CAPEOX and FOLFOX. Other recommended options include capecitabine and 5-FU. Chemotherapy is typically given for 3 to 6 months. The length of treatment depends on the regimen and the risk of recurrence. Surveillance Follow-up testing is started when there are no signs of cancer after treatment. It can help find new cancer growth early. Stage 1 A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery for stage 1 cancers. If the results are normal, your next colonoscopy should be in 3 years, and then every 5 years. If a concerning or high-risk adenoma is found, your next colonoscopy will be needed within 1 year. If you don’t have any symptoms, other testing is not needed on a regular basis.
1409	Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread. It is based on how different the tumor cells look compared to normal cells under a microscope. The more different they look, the higher the risk of spreading. Tumor type To diagnose squamous cell skin cancer, you likely had a small sample of tissue removed for testing (a skin biopsy). That tissue sample was then analyzed by a pathologist in order to determine the specific type (and subtype) of cancer. There are certain rare subtypes of squamous cell skin cancer that are more likely to return after treatment. Connective tissue in the tumor Some tumors form fibrous or connective tissue, which is a sign of a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites.
1410	Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible. Risk assessment After squamous cell skin cancer is confirmed, your doctor will consider several features of the cancer to determine if it is a low-, high-, or very high-risk skin cancer. This is important to know because high- or very high-risk disease is treated differently than low-risk disease. A high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence. A very high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence and of metastasis (spread). The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. The following factors are used to determine your risk level. Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs.
1411	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
1412	Your doctor may recommend avoiding sex and exercise for 2 or 3 days before a PSA test. This short break allows PSA to return to its usual level. Drugs and supplements – Some medicines, herbals, and supplements can also affect PSA level. Biopsy – PSA level rises temporarily after a biopsy of the prostate. 66 Now more than ever, those living with cancer are living better, longer lives thanks to the power of research and advancements in treatment.” PSA level doesn’t tell the whole story, though. There are other ways that PSA can be interpreted, such as PSA density. PSA density If you have a larger prostate, you’re also likely to have a higher PSA level. But that doesn’t mean you have a greater risk for prostate cancer. To adjust for this, care providers calculate PSA density. PSA density is the amount of PSA compared to the size of the prostate. PSA density is calculated by dividing the PSA level by the prostate size. The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer.
1413	Precancer There are abnormal cells on the surface of the anal canal or perianal region. These lesions may develop into cancer. Names for anal precancer include stage 0 anal cancer, anal dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, high-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), and highgrade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL). Treatment may involve close monitoring, electrocautery by an HRA provider, or surgical removal. Stage I In stage I anal cancer, the tumor is 2 cm or smaller. Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage I anal cancer is described as T1, N0, M Stage II Stage II anal cancer is divided into 2 substages, depending on the size of the tumor. Anal tumors larger than 2 cm but not larger than 5 cm are stage IIA. This stage is described as T2, N0, MAnal tumors larger than 5 cm are stage IIB. This stage is described as T3, N0, M Stage II anal cancers have not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage III Stage III anal cancer is divided into 3 substages. There may be cancer in nearby lymph nodes.
1414	For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a core sample. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. Genetic cancer risk testing Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva from spitting into a cup or a cheek swab. The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your birth parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, blood relatives might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. Biomarker testing A sample from your biopsy will undergo lab tests to look for specific DNA mutations/ alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Biomarker testing is performed on a case-by-case basis and may increase the time it takes for biopsy results. Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing.
1415	This is frequently performed under light sedation by an interventional radiologist. It can also be performed by your surgeon in the office. Surgical (open) biopsy removes a sample of the tumor through a small incision. A surgical biopsy should be performed by your treating surgeon. This requires a trip to the operating room. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests might be done in certain cases. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy It is recommended that a biopsy be performed by an experienced surgeon at the cancer center where you will receive treatment. Your bone marrow is like a sponge holding liquid and cells. An aspirate takes some of the liquid and cells out of the sponge, and a biopsy takes a piece of the sponge. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. Your doctors will first clean and give sedation and/or numb your skin and outer surface of your bone. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone.
1416	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
1417	Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). For stage 3 disease, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) may be used during ICS. HIPEC is a technique in which chemotherapy is warmed and then circulated in the spaces between the organs of the abdomen during surgery. If cancer improves after several cycles of chemotherapy, surgery is usually recommended. If cancer stays the same, your doctor may recommend proceeding with surgery or continuing chemotherapy to see if there is improvement. After surgery, more chemotherapy is usually given. Maintenance therapy may follow once your cancer is in remission. Staging The information gained during surgery and surgical staging is used to determine the pathologic (post-surgery) stage. The pathologic stage provides the most accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread. It is used to guide treatment after surgery. A staging system is a standard way of describing the extent of cancer in the body. There are 2 staging systems for ovarian cancer. One was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the other by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO). They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often.
1418	Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. There are also genetic abnormalities that don’t run in families and aren’t inherited. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared to white males. Hispanic and Asian males are less likely than both white and Black males to be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Several things contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), as well as biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean?
1419	Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene. So it would be called an astrocytoma IDH-mutant. When these 3 classifications are put together, it provides a full description of the glioma. For example, an “astrocytoma IDH-mutant grade 2” names its cell type (astrocytoma), its biomarker (IDH-mutant), and its growth rate (grade 2). Let’s look at each of these classifications in turn. Histology Histology means evaluating the structure of cells or tissues under a microscope. A neuropathologist does a histologic analysis when inspecting tissue from a biopsy. The neuropathologist will examine the tumor cells to classify the disease. The neuropathologist’s report will state if the tumor started in the central nervous system or elsewhere. If the tumor is a glioma, the cell type will be noted in the report. The types of gliomas are named after the glial cells that they resemble. The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes.
1420	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation can be found at NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Bone marrow tests Leukemia starts in the bone marrow. To diagnose AML, samples of bone marrow are usually removed and tested before starting any treatment. The bone marrow sample should be reviewed by a pathologist who is an expert in the diagnosis of AML. This review is often referred to as histology, histopathology, or hematopathology review. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells.
1421	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
1422	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
1423	The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus. Other risk factors for anal cancer include HIV infection, immunosuppressant use, a history of certain cancers or pre-cancers, certain autoimmune disorders, smoking, and a history of anal sex or sexually transmitted infection. h Recommended testing after diagnosis includes DRE, anoscopy, HIV testing, an screening for cervical cancer. The cancer stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body. Stages I, II, and III are non-metastatic. Stage IV is metastatic. 2 Treatment guide 17 Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) 20 Perianal cancer (stages I – III) 22 Follow-up and surveillance 24 Recurrence 26 Metastatic anal cancer 28 Clinical trials 30 Key points 2 Treatment guide Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. Surgery to remove the anus may be needed for cancer that does not respond to treatment or that returns after treatment. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
1424	During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. You will be able to hear and speak with a technician at all times. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and mixed with a liquid to drink. You may feel flushed or get hives. Some people have an allergic reaction. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not often used to plan treatment for colon cancer. Your doctor may order an MRI to get a better look at the liver or rectum, or if the CT scan results are unclear. Getting an MRI is much like getting a CT scan. In some cases, the area of the body being imaged is placed within a narrowed coil device that looks like a brace. It covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. It sends and receives radio waves. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. An MRI may cause your body to feel warm.
1425	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
1426	HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT). To find a donor match, your proteins will be compared to the donor’s proteins to see how many proteins are the same. A very good match is needed for a transplant to be a treatment option. Otherwise, your body will reject the donor cells or the donor cells will react against your body. Blood or tissue samples from you and your blood relatives will be tested first. Fertility (all genders) Treatment with targeted therapy and other forms of systemic therapy can affect your fertility, or the ability to have children. If possible, ask your care team before starting therapy how cancer and cancer treatment might affect your fertility. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation.
1427	Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of changes to this list. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. Set up an online patient portal (MyChart or health record account) if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Remember, many times, the portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician. Be sure to ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. More information on these tests is on the following pages. For possible tests, see Guide Hodgkin Lymphoma in Adults About the NCCN Guidelines for Patients ® Did you know that top cancer centers across the United States work together to improve cancer care? This alliance of leading cancer centers is called the National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . Cancer care is always changing. NCCN develops evidence-based cancer care recommendations used by health care providers worldwide.
1428	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1429	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
1430	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
1431	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
1432	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
1433	Guide 1 Possible tests Medical history and physical exam (H&P) by multidisciplinary team. Medical photographs will also be taken. Complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) including liver function tests (LFTs), and alkaline phosphatase Biopsy with pathology review Determine tumor status including: • Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) hormone receptor (HR) status • HER2 status Address fertility, birth control, and sexual health concerns Genetic counseling and testing if at risk for hereditary breast cancer Imaging: • Diagnostic mammogram. Ultrasound and breast MRI, as needed • Chest CT. Contrast might be used. • CT or MRI of abdomen with or without pelvis. Contrast will be used. • Bone scan or PET-CT Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes.
1434	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
1435	Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes. It is possible to have MBC when axillary lymph nodes do not have cancer. 省 Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 2 Testing for MBC Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing. Your care team will gather information about the cancer you have. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. The biopsy sample will be tested for estrogen and progesterone hormone receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results.
1436	It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling. Hormone receptor-negative Hormone receptor-negative (HR-) breast cancer cells do not have either estrogen or progesterone hormone receptors. These cancers are sometimes simply called hormone negative. HR- cancers often grow faster than cancers. Both the estrogen and progesterone receptors need to be negative for the cancer to be considered HR-. Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells In breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in at least 1 out of every 100 cancer cells. In ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer, testing finds estrogen hormone receptors in 1 to 10 out of every 100 cancer cells. Endocrine therapy might not be recommended for ER-low–positive invasive breast cancer. HER2 status Inflammatory breast cancers often produce greater than normal amounts of HERHuman epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a protein involved in normal cell growth. It is found on the surface of all cells. When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive .
1437	A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell. Hormones recognize and bind to specific hormone receptors. When hormones attach to receptors on breast cancer cells, they can cause cancer to grow. If found, these receptors may be targeted using endocrine therapy. There are 2 types of hormone receptors: Estrogen – plays a role in breast development Progesterone – plays a role in menstrual cycle and pregnancy Hormone receptor (HR) testing should be done on any new tumors. A biopsy sample will be used. Hormone receptor-positive In hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, IHC finds estrogen and/or progesterone hormone receptors. Most breast cancers are . Estrogen receptor (ER) is stimulated by estrogen and provides survival and proliferation (rapid growth) signals. Cancer cells deprived of estrogen or which have their ER signal blocked with treatment may stop growing or die. Progesterone receptor (PR) binds progesterone and also provides survival and proliferation signals. It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling.
1438	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
1439	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
1440	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1441	Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. Treatments for early-stage prostate cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy, among others. However, some people with prostate cancer don’t need to be treated right away. Many patients with early-stage prostate cancer can have their cancer managed with active surveillance. During active surveillance, you’ll have regular tests to keep an eye on your cancer. But you won’t have treatment unless the cancer grows or changes in a way that requires treatment. The goal of active surveillance is to avoid the potential side effects of treatment, with the option for treatment in the future if you need it. Some patients on active surveillance may never have to be treated. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease.
1442	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
1443	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
1444	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
1445	If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made.
1446	Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin. Excision biopsy During an excision biopsy, all or part of the lesion is removed. This biopsy can be done in Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, and genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used.
1447	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
1448	Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Throat cancer staging How throat cancer is staged TNM scores p16- (HPV-) cancer stages cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Testing for p16 (HPV) is an important part of staging. This chapter explains throat cancer stages. How throat cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage.
1449	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
1450	A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 and under. There are two other HPV vaccines available in other parts of the world. One protects against HPV-16 and HPV-18 only. The other targets these and two additional types. The vaccine works best in younger people (ideally under age 13) because they are less likely to have been exposed to HPV. And, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPVrelated cancer. Other risk factors Other risk factors for cervical cancer are listed below. Some of these lead to a higher risk because they either increase the risk of being exposed to HPV or they weaken the immune system, which can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection.
1451	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
1452	Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Throat cancer staging How throat cancer is staged TNM scores p16- (HPV-) cancer stages cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Testing for p16 (HPV) is an important part of staging. This chapter explains throat cancer stages. How throat cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage.
1453	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
1454	A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 and under. There are two other HPV vaccines available in other parts of the world. One protects against HPV-16 and HPV-18 only. The other targets these and two additional types. The vaccine works best in younger people (ideally under age 13) because they are less likely to have been exposed to HPV. And, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPVrelated cancer. Other risk factors Other risk factors for cervical cancer are listed below. Some of these lead to a higher risk because they either increase the risk of being exposed to HPV or they weaken the immune system, which can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection.
1455	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
1456	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
1457	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
1458	It is important to know your HIV status. If you have not been tested for HIV, your provider may recommend that you get tested. If you have HIV, getting the care you need may also improve cancer treatment outcomes. Gynecologic exam A gynecologic exam, including screening for cervical cancer, is recommended. Like anal cancer, HPV is the cause of almost all cervical cancers. Cervical cancer screening involves scraping cells from the cervix and testing them for HPV, cancer, and cell changes that may lead to cancer. If testing for HPV is not performed, it is simply called a Pap test. If the cells are tested for both HPV and cancer, it is called an HPV/Pap co-test. MRI You may have an MRI to determine the extent of the cancer in the pelvis. MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body. Unlike a CT scan, MRI does not use radiation. Staging The results of testing are used to determine the cancer stage. The stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body.
1459	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
1460	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
1461	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
1462	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
1463	No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards. Some people have minor bleeding and discomfort for a few days following the procedure. Sometimes HRA is done in the operating room under general anesthesia. SISCCA Superficially invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SISCCA) is the earliest form of anal cancer. These small lesions are often found accidentally. They may be found during a biopsy, or during removal of growths thought to be non-cancerous. Such growths may include genital warts, hemorrhoids, or anal skin tags. These cancers are tiny (less than 7 mm wide, smaller than a pea) and not deep at all. Treatment for SISCCA is evolving. If the lesion is completely removed during surgery, further treatment may not be needed. However, close follow-up that includes HRA and other testing to check for spread to nearby lymph nodes is needed. Most of the information in this guide does not apply to SISCCA. This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA.
1464	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
1465	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
1466	If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. The possible grades are 1, 2, or Cervical dysplasia becomes cancer when the abnormal cells invade the muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining (the cervical stroma). An area of dysplasia or cancer is also referred to as a lesion. Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Cervical changes Cervical dysplasia refers to areas of abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. Lowgrade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors may develop cervical cancer, while others with risk factors may not. HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI).
1467	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
1468	Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection. The use of Pap smears has resulted in much lower rates of cervical cancer in the United States. The cervix The cervix is the narrow, lower end of the uterus. The uterus is where a baby grows and develops before being born. During birth, the cervix opens (dilates) and thins (effaces) to allow the baby to move into the vagina. The vagina, or birth canal, is the muscular passage through which babies are born. An ovary and a fallopian tube are on each side of the upper uterus. The fallopian tubes connect to the top part of the uterus. The ovaries make eggs for sexual reproduction. They also make hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle. Eggs pass out of the ovary and travel through the attached fallopian tube into the uterus. The cervix, uterus, vagina, ovaries, and fallopian tubes are part of the female reproductive system. The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction.
1469	Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Biopsy of main tumor with human papillomavirus (HPV) testing by p16 Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
1470	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
1471	Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign of bone tumors, liver disorders, or pregnancy. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. RBCs carry oxygen throughout your body, WBCs fight infection, and PLTs control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. A CMP will look for higher than normal calcium levels in your blood called hypercalcemia. Calcium is needed for healthy teeth, bones, and other body tissues. Bone damage from cancer can cause your bones to release calcium into the bloodstream, which can lead to illness and other health issues. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1472	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
1473	If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction?
1474	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1475	A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous. A high TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are low. A low TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are high. This is called hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid. Your provider may order a radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake test. Ultrasound Ultrasound is the most common imaging technique used to look for thyroid cancer. It uses sound waves to form images showing the size, shape, and location of a thyroid nodule. An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is brief and painless. It is usually done lying down. A Ultrasound An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is one of the first tests ordered if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. hand-held device called an ultrasound probe is used. After a gel is applied to the skin, the probe is moved back and forth over the thyroid area. If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer.
1476	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1477	Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold. Skin has 3 layers: Epidermis is the outermost (top) layer of skin that provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis contains connective tissue, hair follicles, and sweat glands. Hypodermis (subcutis) is the deepest layer, made up of fat and connective tissue. Skin cancers are often formed in the epidermis. There are 3 main types of cells in the epidermis: Squamous cells: These cells are thin, flat cells that look like fish scales, and are found in the tissue that forms the surface of the skin. Basal cells: These cells are found in the lower part of the epidermis, called the basal cell layer. Basal cells constantly divide to form new cells to replace the squamous cells that wear off of the skin’s surface. As these cells move up in the epidermis, they get flatter, eventually becoming squamous cells. Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes.
1478	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
1479	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
1480	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
1481	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
1482	Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow.
1483	Hysterectomy with BSO The most common surgery for ovarian cancer is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO). A hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus. When the cervix is removed in addition to the uterus, it is called a total or complete hysterectomy. A BSO removes both ovaries and both fallopian tubes. Pregnancy isn’t possible after a hysterectomy. Fertility-sparing surgery (described below) may be an option for some very early ovarian cancers that haven't spread beyond the ovaries. If cancer has spread outside the ovaries, your surgeon will attempt to remove as much of it as possible. This is called debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The extent of the surgery depends on how far the cancer has spread. It may involve removing all or part of nearby organs. Lymph nodes that look abnormal or that are larger than normal will also be removed when possible. Fertility-sparing surgery Pregnancy isn’t possible after the uterus is removed. This is difficult for those wishing to get pregnant in the future. Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place.
1484	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
1485	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
1486	HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized therapy in addition to cancer treatment. So everyone with primary CNS lymphoma needs to have an HIV blood test. List all your drugs and supplements Your treatment team will ask you to write a list of all the prescription drugs you take and how often you take them. Make copies of this list, which you can give to the many other providers or specialists you may see. Also be sure to tell your treatment team if you’re using any over-the-counter medicines (including antacids, aspirin, or NSAIDs like ibuprofen) or supplements, vitamins, or herbs. Some of these can interfere with your cancer treatment. For example, some supplements or herbs can raise or lower the levels of chemotherapy drugs in your body. This may cause more side effects or make your treatment less effective. 3 Treatment options Clinical trial Steroids Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Stem cell rescue Supportive care What’s next? Key points This chapter lists the different treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma. Ask your care team about the risks and benefits of each option. Together, you and your team can make a treatment plan.
1487	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
1488	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
1489	Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene. So it would be called an astrocytoma IDH-mutant. When these 3 classifications are put together, it provides a full description of the glioma. For example, an “astrocytoma IDH-mutant grade 2” names its cell type (astrocytoma), its biomarker (IDH-mutant), and its growth rate (grade 2). Let’s look at each of these classifications in turn. Histology Histology means evaluating the structure of cells or tissues under a microscope. A neuropathologist does a histologic analysis when inspecting tissue from a biopsy. The neuropathologist will examine the tumor cells to classify the disease. The neuropathologist’s report will state if the tumor started in the central nervous system or elsewhere. If the tumor is a glioma, the cell type will be noted in the report. The types of gliomas are named after the glial cells that they resemble. The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes.
1490	Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene. So it would be called an astrocytoma IDH-mutant. When these 3 classifications are put together, it provides a full description of the glioma. For example, an “astrocytoma IDH-mutant grade 2” names its cell type (astrocytoma), its biomarker (IDH-mutant), and its growth rate (grade 2). Let’s look at each of these classifications in turn. Histology Histology means evaluating the structure of cells or tissues under a microscope. A neuropathologist does a histologic analysis when inspecting tissue from a biopsy. The neuropathologist will examine the tumor cells to classify the disease. The neuropathologist’s report will state if the tumor started in the central nervous system or elsewhere. If the tumor is a glioma, the cell type will be noted in the report. The types of gliomas are named after the glial cells that they resemble. The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes.
1491	This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), nivolumab (Opdivo), or ipilimumab (Yervoy) might be used for TMB-H tumors in some cases. Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your birth parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Mutation testing uses methods such as nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IDH1 mutation Some gene mutations such as IDH1 can be targeted with specific therapies such as ivosidenib (Tibsovo). Ivosidenib is for those with chondrosarcoma who are prone to have IDH1 mutations. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
1492	This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), nivolumab (Opdivo), or ipilimumab (Yervoy) might be used for TMB-H tumors in some cases. Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your birth parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Mutation testing uses methods such as nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IDH1 mutation Some gene mutations such as IDH1 can be targeted with specific therapies such as ivosidenib (Tibsovo). Ivosidenib is for those with chondrosarcoma who are prone to have IDH1 mutations. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
1493	Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL.
1494	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
1495	Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis. The goal is to cure the cancer by removing all of the organs to which cancer has or may spread. All remaining organs of the female reproductive system are removed during pelvic exenteration. This includes the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and vagina. Nearby organs in the pelvis including the bladder, rectum, and/or anus may also be removed. If the bladder and/or organs involved in bowel function are removed, a diversion is typically performed. Diversions are surgical procedures that divert (redirect) urine and/or stool to new openings through which they exit the body. Vaginal reconstruction It is often possible to reconstruct the vagina after pelvic exenteration. A surgeon can create an artificial vagina using muscle from another area of your body. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominus is often used for vaginal reconstruction. This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion.
1496	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
1497	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1498	Primary CNS lymphoma is frequently linked to HIV, the immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Carrying the Epstein-Barr virus, which is the virus that causes mononucleosis (“mono”) and other illnesses. Epstein-Barr is one of the most common viruses in humans. Most people are infected with it. After you’re infected, the virus remains dormant (inactive or “sleeping”) in your body for life. Having an autoimmune disease, such as lupus, in which the immune system overreacts and attacks healthy tissues and organs. Having an organ transplant, which requires medications that suppress the immune system. This leads to a higher risk of infections. Being an older adult. Although primary CNS lymphoma can occur at any age, the majority of people diagnosed with it are in their 60s or 70s. How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Primary CNS lymphoma is often found when a person develops symptoms. A symptom is a feeling or problem that may be a sign of disease. Symptoms usually develop over several weeks. Primary CNS lymphoma can cause a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain.
1499	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
1500	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
1501	The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for basal cell skin cancer 10 General health tests 12 Biopsy 13 Imaging 13 What’s next 14 Key points 14 Questions to ask Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and then treat basal cell skin cancer. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Whether you or your doctor found a concerning lesion on your skin, testing is needed to identify and diagnose basal cell skin cancer. The diagnosis is based on the results in your medical and family history, a physical exam, skin exam, and biopsy, and, in some cases, imaging studies. See Guide Your diagnosis will determine your treatment plan.
1502	These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypT Anyone can give up; It’s the easiest thing in the world to do, but to hold it together when everyone would expect for you to fall apart, now that is true strength.” Lymph nodes in the head and neck There are over 300 lymph nodes in the head and neck. Most tumors spread to nearby lymph nodes. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage mouth cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage.
1503	Imaging may also be used after cancer treatment to see how well it worked and to check if the cancer comes back. Imaging methods for prostate cancer include MRI, CT, PET, ultrasound, bone scan, or a combination of these. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. An MRI can be used to get a more detailed view of the cancer within the prostate. It’s also used to see if cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes or to the bones in your pelvis. MRI scans can also help to plan treatment, and may be used after treatment to check whether the cancer has come back (recurrence). An appointment for an MRI scan can take 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as jewelry, phones, wristwatches, or belts with metal buckles) into the imaging room.
1504	Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs.
1505	Like a CT scanner, an MRI is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. Unlike CT, MRI doesn’t use radiation (x-rays). An MRI also makes much more noise and takes longer than a CT scan. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Imaging To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have an imaging scan of your abdomen and pelvis. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as a cell phone, wristwatch, belt with a metal buckle, or jewelry) into the imaging room. Other types of imaging CT and MRI are commonly used to see how far bladder cancer has spread. Other types of imaging are sometimes used to look for cancer in other parts of the urinary tract or other parts of the body: Urogram uses a contrast solution and either CT or MRI to see how well your entire urinary tract is working.
1506	Share this information with your care team and update your team with any changes to your family history. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems). You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has full and upto-date information about how you’re doing. Diagnostic tests Diagnostic tests are used to confirm you have cancer. They’re also used to find out if the cancer is localized or advanced. Diagnostic tests can help plan treatment after you’ve been diagnosed and can detect whether the cancer is still growing or spreading after treatment. Diagnostic tests include imaging scans, biopsies, and genetic tests. Imaging tests An imaging test takes pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images can reveal cancer, including its size, location, and other features such as the size of the prostate itself.
1507	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
1508	Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer. The images can reveal a lymphoma’s location, size, and other features. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging technique for identifying primary CNS lymphoma. An MRI scan is good at showing the spine and soft tissues, including the brain, as well as other details that are helpful for planning surgery. MRI uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. During an MRI, you’ll lie on a table that slides into the scanning machine. (An open MRI scanner may be an option at some health care centers.) It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best pictures. The machine makes loud noises but you can wear earplugs. An MRI of the brain or spinal cord usually requires a contrast agent (also called contrast dye or just contrast). Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see.
1509	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
1510	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
1511	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
1512	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
1513	It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse. Maintenance therapy is an option for stage 2, 3, and 4 cancers that respond well to surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. PARP inhibitors (PARPi) are a newer option for maintenance therapy after initial treatment. These oral targeted therapies work best in homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)- positive cancers, including those caused by a BRCA mutation. PARP inhibitors currently used for maintenance therapy after initial treatment of ovarian cancer include: Olaparib (Lynparza) Niraparib (Zejula) Rucaparib (Rubraca) The most common side effects of PARP inhibitors are similar to those caused by chemotherapy. They include fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and low blood cell counts. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Myelodysplastic syndrome is a cancer in which the bone marrow does not make enough healthy blood cells. There are abnormal cells in the blood and/or bone marrow. Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML.
1514	AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found.
1515	EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide. Inhibiting (blocking) EGFR may keep cancer cells from growing. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is an EGFR inhibitor used to treat CSCC and other cancers. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy stimulates the activity of the immune system, which can improve the body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapies used to treat CSCC and other cancers are known as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) inhibitors. PD-1 inhibitors are a type of immune checkpoint inhibitor. Cemiplimab (Libtayo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are PD-1 inhibitors used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. Uses for systemic therapy Systemic therapy is not often used by itself to treat squamous cell skin cancer. It may be used in combination with radiation therapy to treat CSCC that can’t be removed using surgery. Systemic therapy alone may also be an option if both surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. In this case, immunotherapy with a PD-1 inhibitor is preferred. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used.
1516	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
1517	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
1518	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
1519	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
1520	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
1521	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1522	You will get through this. It might seem hard at times toward the end of treatment and the following weeks and months while you recover, but it will pass. I tried to just stay focused on the goal of getting through to the other side to whatever comes next. – Thom Anal cancer survivor Ostomy You can still lead an active lifestyle with an ostomy. However, it is a good idea to consult with an ostomy professional before any vigorous or high-intensity physical activity. Healthy habits Monitoring for the return of anal cancer is important after finishing treatment. But, it is also important to keep up with other aspects of your health. Steps you can take to help prevent other health issues and to improve your quality of life are described next. Get screened for other types of cancer, such as breast, cervical, colorectal, or prostate cancer. Your primary care doctor should tell you what cancer screening tests you should have based on your sex, age, and risk level. Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight.
1523	What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it. Although no one knows exactly what causes a lymphoma, we do know that lymphomas often start with a genetic abnormality (mutation) in certain lymphocytes. This abnormality causes these lymphocytes to grow out of control (become cancerous). The abnormality occurs on its own. It’s not a mutation that occurs in other cells or organs in your body. And it’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Although primary CNS lymphoma is rare, it could happen to almost anyone. However, some people with certain risk factors have a greater chance. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. For example, having a reduced immune system increases the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause a disease (and just because you have risk factors, it doesn’t mean you'll definitely get the disease). But people with primary CNS lymphoma often have one or more of these risk factors: Having an immunodeficiency disorder, which is an illness that weakens the immune system’s ability to fight infections and diseases.
1524	When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive . You might hear it called HER2 overexpression or amplification. There are 2 tests for HER2: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measures receptors. If the IHC score is , the cancer is . If the score is 0 or 1, it is considered HER2-. If the score is , further testing is needed. In situ hybridization (ISH) counts the number of copies of the HER2 gene. This test is done mainly when the IHC score is unclear. HER2 testing should be done on all new tumors. A tumor biopsy sample will be used. You might have more than one HER2 test. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. These cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC can find estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptors in breast cancer cells. A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell.
1525	Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). An excisional biopsy is when a whole lymph node is removed by a surgeon, while an incisional biopsy removes only part of a lymph node. There are many lymph nodes throughout your body, so if you have a lymph node removed, you won’t lose your ability to fight infections and disease. Needle biopsies take a small sample of a lymph node using a needle. They can be done when other biopsies are not safe to perform. A lab test will be used to find the immunophenotype of the biopsied cells. A bone marrow biopsy removes a core sample of marrow. A bone marrow aspiration removes liquid and cells from the marrow. These procedures are usually done at the same time. They’re performed on the back of the hip bone. You may receive an injected pain blocker or light sedative to help you relax. Tests of bone marrow aren’t usually needed for diagnosis, so you might not get one. How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers.
1526	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
1527	The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus. Other risk factors for anal cancer include HIV infection, immunosuppressant use, a history of certain cancers or pre-cancers, certain autoimmune disorders, smoking, and a history of anal sex or sexually transmitted infection. h Recommended testing after diagnosis includes DRE, anoscopy, HIV testing, an screening for cervical cancer. The cancer stage is an assessment of the extent of cancer in the body. Stages I, II, and III are non-metastatic. Stage IV is metastatic. 2 Treatment guide 17 Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) 20 Perianal cancer (stages I – III) 22 Follow-up and surveillance 24 Recurrence 26 Metastatic anal cancer 28 Clinical trials 30 Key points 2 Treatment guide Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiation (chemoradiation) is recommended for most non-metastatic anal cancers. Surgery to remove the anus may be needed for cancer that does not respond to treatment or that returns after treatment. Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
1528	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
1529	In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed. Urine and stool are kept separate until they exit the body through the same stoma. Compared to having separate urinary and fecal diversions, DBWC has been found to have other benefits, such as fewer leaks. Metastatic cancer If left untreated, or if not diagnosed early, cervical cancer often spreads to the liver, lungs, and/or bone. Cervical cancer that has spread to these organs is metastatic. Cancer that had already metastasized when it was found is stage 4B. If cancer returns and metastasizes after treatment, it is known as a distant recurrence. The information in this section applies to both types of metastatic disease. Metastatic cervical cancer is very hard to cure. Treatment is usually with systemic therapy. The goal is to keep the cancer under control and prevent further spread. If the tumor has not already been tested for biomarkers, it may be tested now. Biomarker testing can help determine whether you may be eligible for certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies. It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below.
1530	In some cases, systemic therapy is used in addition to radiation. Platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation if you can have it. Enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy may also be an option. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may damage critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. If you are eligible, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is preferred. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is a recommended treatment option for high-risk or very high-risk local CSCC. A wider margin (area of normal tissue around the lesion) is removed for highrisk or very high-risk CSCC. If standard surgical excision is successful at removing the cancer but other concerning features are noted during surgery, a discussion with different cancer doctors is recommended to determine next steps. Treatment with radiation therapy will be considered. If testing after surgery finds cancer in the margin, more treatment is needed. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is possible, it is usually tried first. Otherwise, another standard surgical excision is typically performed.
1531	It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate. High doses of methotrexate are needed to overcome the blood-brain barrier and still have enough strength to kill lymphoma cells. The blood-brain barrier is a protective layer around the brain that prevents germs, infections, and other toxins from getting in. But it also blocks some chemotherapy drugs like methotrexate from reaching the brain. For induction therapy, high-dose methotrexate is given together with the immunotherapy drug rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab can be given on its own but it usually works better when given with chemotherapy. In addition to methotrexate and rituximab, one or more other chemotherapy medicines such as temozolomide, vincristine, and procarbazine may also be included. Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone.
1532	Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility. It can happen to people of any gender. You may receive a referral to a fertility specialist. A fertility specialist is an expert in helping people have babies. They can explain how you may be able to have a baby during or after treatment. Collecting and freezing sperm or eggs is a common method. More information on fertility preservation can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cancer treatment can impact one's ability to have children. Before starting treatment, talk with a fertility counselor to learn what your options are for fertility preservation. What’s a prognosis? Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease based on tests. Prognosis is used to predict how the cancer will turn out. Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know.
1533	Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord. Primary CNS lymphoma occurs more often in the brain than in the spinal cord, but it can also involve the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Lymphoma – Lymphoma is cancer that forms from lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. So, a lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth of lymphocytes. Now let’s put it all together: Primary CNS lymphoma is a cancer that begins when lymphocytes in the brain and spinal cord grow out of control. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in lymphocytes in the immune system. The immune system is your body’s natural defense against infection and disease. Having an impaired immune system may increase the risk of developing this cancer. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas within the nervous system. For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body.
1534	A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel. The scan won’t hurt, but if you need contrast you will need to get a needle placed in your arm. A radiologist will review your scans and send the results to your oncologist. 66 I am so grateful I had a consultation with a CLL specialist. It was reassuring to finally speak to a CLL specialist. The doctor answered all my questions thoroughly. I am very satisfied with the advice I received." What if I’m pregnant? Some cancer treatments can harm an unborn baby. If you have the potential to become pregnant, your cancer care team will give you a pregnancy test before treatment. Your treatment options will depend on the results. Preserving fertility Many people have healthy babies despite cancer and its treatment. If you wish to have kids, there are important steps to take before treatment. Even if you are unsure, talk to your cancer care team. Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility.
1535	A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health problems such as arthritis. The scan takes about 30 minutes. You will be asked to hold still during the scan. At one point the scanner will be less than one inch from your face. Talk to your care team about what to expect. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies.
1536	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
1537	When amounts are high, it causes cells to grow and divide. Some breast cancers have too many HER2 genes or receptors. Too many HER2s is called HER2-positive . You might hear it called HER2 overexpression or amplification. There are 2 tests for HER2: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) measures receptors. If the IHC score is , the cancer is . If the score is 0 or 1, it is considered HER2-. If the score is , further testing is needed. In situ hybridization (ISH) counts the number of copies of the HER2 gene. This test is done mainly when the IHC score is unclear. HER2 testing should be done on all new tumors. A tumor biopsy sample will be used. You might have more than one HER2 test. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. These cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC can find estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptors in breast cancer cells. A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell.
1538	Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place. Surgery to remove one ovary and its fallopian tube is called a unilateral salpingooophorectomy (USO). USO is only an option if the cancer is in 1 ovary and the cancer is appropriate for this procedure. After a USO, you may still be able to become pregnant naturally if you haven’t entered menopause. If the cancer is in both ovaries, a BSO (without hysterectomy) may be an option. While you can't become pregnant naturally after a BSO, pregnancy may be possible using assisted reproductive approaches. One such approach is in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, eggs are fertilized with sperm in a lab to create embryos. The embryos are implanted into the uterus or frozen for future use. The eggs used for IVF may be yours (removed from your ovary before surgery) or donor eggs. Donor eggs are removed from women who have volunteered to go through hormone treatment to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen.
1539	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
1540	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
1541	A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine.
1542	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
1543	A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed).
1544	A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed).
1545	A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed).
1546	The prostate gland makes a fluid that nourishes and helps transmit sperm. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis. Urethra: A tube that carries urine from the bladder and out of the body. The prostate surrounds the urethra just beneath the bladder. Seminal vesicles: Two glands that make and store another part of the fluid that becomes semen. The seminal vesicles are located above the prostate and behind the bladder. Bladder: An organ that holds urine. Having a close family member with prostate cancer (a sibling or parent) increases the chance of getting it yourself. Those with a family history of certain other cancers (breast, ovarian, colon, pancreatic, and other cancers) may also be at higher risk for prostate cancer. Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers.
1547	After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors.
1548	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
1549	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
1550	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
1551	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
1552	Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers. When viewed under a microscope, Hodgkin lymphoma cells look different than other lymphomas. The lymphocytes are abnormally large and may have more than one nucleus. These oversized lymphocytes are called ReedSternberg cells. The focus of this resource is Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. Information on Hodgkin lymphoma in children and adolescents is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What is the lymphatic system? The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. It helps your body fight infection and disease. The tissues and organs that make up the lymphatic system are described next. They are made mostly of lymphocytes. There are other types of white blood cells, but lymphocytes are the most important to understanding Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymph and lymphatic vessels There is a super-highway of ducts running through your body. These ducts are called lymphatic vessels. Much like how blood vessels transport blood, lymphatic vessels transport lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid.
1553	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
1554	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1555	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1556	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1557	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies.
1558	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
1559	Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer. N0 means no cancer is in the regional lymph nodes. Isolated tumor cells (ITCs) may be present. These are malignant cell clusters no larger than . N1mi means micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than , but not larger than ) are found in lymph nodes. N1, N2, N3 means regional lymph node metastases are found. The higher the number, the more lymph nodes that have metastases. M Metastasis Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is shown as MThis is metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The most common sites for metastasis are bone and lung. M0 means no evidence of distant metastasis. M1 means distant metastasis is found. This is metastatic breast cancer. Clinical staging Clinical staging of lymph nodes is staging before surgery. Cancer is in axillary nodes Cancer is in internal mammary nodes Cancer is in infraclavicular nodes Cancer is in supraclavicular nodes Grade Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers.
1560	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
1561	Food and Drug Administration (FDA). colostomy A surgery that allows stool to leave the body after the anus is removed. The end of the bowel is attached to an opening in the surface of the abdomen. Stool is collected in a disposable bag outside of the body. groin The area of the body where the thigh meets the abdomen. human papillomavirus (HPV) A virus that affects almost everyone who has been sexually active. HPV can cause abnormal tissue growth (for example, warts) and other changes to cells. Anal cancer is almost always caused by HPV infection. infertility The inability to produce children. inguinal lymph nodes Lymph nodes in the groin. intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) A type of external radiation therapy that uses many beams of different intensities. A recommended type of radiation therapy for anal cancer. libido Sexual desire or the mental energy or emotion related to sex. perianal region The anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. systemic therapy Cancer treatment with medicines that travel through the bloodstream, reaching and affecting cells all over the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. vaginal stenosis A condition in which the vagina becomes narrower and shorter.
1562	Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition Rectal cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Key points All rectal tumors should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For cancers with this biomarker, testing for an inherited cancer syndrome called Lynch syndrome is recommended. Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS).
1563	It is common to have another colonoscopy to thoroughly examine the colon and look for other possible areas of cancer. This is called a diagnostic colonoscopy. Mismatch repair testing Mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI) testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with colon cancer. This feature of some colon cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that help guide your treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome, described next. Family health history Your doctor will ask about the health history of your biological (related by blood) family members. Those with a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer are more likely to have this cancer compared to the average person. Most colon cancers occur for unknown reasons.
1564	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
1565	Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. This is called egg freezing or oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mismatch repair testing All colon cancers should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Testing for this biomarker involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Cancers that do not have these biomarkers are called microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history.
1566	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
1567	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1568	Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing lung cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed down from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, lung, heart, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Known risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Lung cancer basics What is lung cancer? What are the causes and risk factors? What are the symptoms of SCLC? What's the treatment for SCLC? Key points Small cell lung cancer forms from cells that line the inner airways of the lungs. It’s a cancer that can be aggressive and grows fast. This chapter gives you the basics of small cell lung cancer. What is lung cancer? The lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system. They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration.
1569	Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade. The grade measures how aggressive the cancer is. It’s a rating of how fast the cancer will likely grow and spread. To figure out the grade, a sample of your tumor will be studied in a laboratory by a pathologist. The pathologist will compare the cancer cells to normal cells. The more different they look, the higher the grade. And the higher the grade, the faster the cancer is expected to spread. LG means that the cancer cells are low grade (slow growing). HG means that the cancer cells are high grade (fast growing). The inner lining of the bladder is made of urothelial cells. Most cases of bladder cancer start in the urothelial cells. So this type of cancer is called urothelial cancer. But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes.
1570	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
1571	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Pregnancy test Those who can become pregnant should be given a pregnancy test before treatment begins. Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body to look for cancer deposits. A medical doctor called a radiologist will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You may not have all of the following tests. X-ray An x-ray is a type of radiation. In small doses, it is used to make pictures of the inside of the body. It might be referred to as a radiograph. Bone scan A bone scan uses a radiotracer. A radiotracer is a substance that releases small amounts of radiation. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer will be injected into your vein. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body.
1572	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
1573	Many people wonder why they got cancer. Cancer experts don’t know exactly what causes bladder cells to grow out of control. What they do know is that bladder cancer and other cancers start with abnormal changes (mutations) in the genes of cells. Genes are tiny parts of a cell that carry the instructions for how cells behave. These instructions also control how new cells are made. Sometimes, mutations can mix up these instructions. This can turn normal cells into cancer cells. In most people with bladder cancer, these mutations aren’t passed down in families (hereditary mutation). They happen on their own and only in cancer cells. Still, you may have a higher risk for bladder cancer if another family member also had bladder cancer. In rare cases, mutations in these genes can be passed down in families. This results in an increased risk of getting bladder cancer. However, only some individuals with these genetic mutations go on to develop bladder cancer. What are the risk factors for bladder cancer? A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause bladder cancer.
1574	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
1575	What causes pancreatic cancer? What are the stages of pancreatic cancer? What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? Key points Pancreatic cancer is one of the most common cancers. It is a challenging cancer to treat, but treatment is improving. Experts are studying the best ways to treat pancreatic cancer and are developing new treatments. Read this chapter to learn the answers to some common questions about pancreatic cancer. What is pancreatic cancer? Pancreatic cancer starts in a large gland called the pancreas. The pancreas is part of the digestive system. It makes enzymes that break down proteins, fats, sugars, and starches in food. It also makes hormones called insulin and glucagon that control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer affects cell growth. Pancreatic cancer cells make many new cancer cells and do not die when they should. The overgrowth of pancreatic cancer cells becomes a mass called a tumor. Pancreatic cancer cells also don’t stay in place and may grow into nearby body tissue. They may break away from a tumor, spread to other areas, and form more tumors. There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells.
1576	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
1577	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
1578	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1579	Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes. Cervical cancer generally spreads to these nodes first. Lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic nodes, are also sometimes removed. Pre-treatment surgical staging If the cancer has spread beyond the cervix, a hysterectomy is not performed but pelvic and/ or para-aortic lymph nodes may be removed and tested before any treatment is given. Knowing whether pelvic or para-aortic nodes contain cancer can help guide treatment decisions for more advanced cancers. A minimally invasive approach is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is referred to as laparoscopic surgical staging. External beam radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. EBRT is given in small doses, called fractions. An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths.
1580	Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist. Over-the-counter ointments like Aquaphor or Silvadene can soothe the skin and help with healing. Other short-term side effects of radiation therapy include diarrhea, fatigue, frequent urination or pain while urinating, and nausea. Most of these decrease over time when treatment is over. Radiation therapy side effects may not be felt immediately. They can appear and worsen later in the cycle or even after it is complete. Radiation therapy for anal cancer can also have long-term and potentially serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. See “Fertility and family planning” on page 14 and Part 3: Survivorship for information on ways to help prevent, limit, or manage these effects. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of anti-cancer medicines. It is a type of systemic therapy. Most commonly, chemotherapy is given intravenously. This means the medicine(s) are slowly infused into the body through a vein. The medicine(s) travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can also be given orally. Radiation therapy An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer.
1581	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1582	Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer. N0 means no cancer is in the regional lymph nodes. Isolated tumor cells (ITCs) may be present. These are malignant cell clusters no larger than . N1mi means micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than , but not larger than ) are found in lymph nodes. N1, N2, N3 means regional lymph node metastases are found. The higher the number, the more lymph nodes that have metastases. M Metastasis Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is shown as MThis is metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The most common sites for metastasis are bone and lung. M0 means no evidence of distant metastasis. M1 means distant metastasis is found. This is metastatic breast cancer. Clinical staging Clinical staging of lymph nodes is staging before surgery. Cancer is in axillary nodes Cancer is in internal mammary nodes Cancer is in infraclavicular nodes Cancer is in supraclavicular nodes Grade Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers.
1583	Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function. As a result of this mutation, the gene isn’t able to make a normal protein so the protein can’t do its necessary job. This can affect the usual activities of the cell, which can lead to disease, such as cancer. Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be in your body before you’re born (called a hereditary or germline mutation) or occur by Biopsy of the metastasis Prostate cancer may metastasize to lymph nodes, bones, or internal organs. A biopsy of a metastasis (as seen here, taken from the liver) uses a hollow needle to remove a small core of tissue. The tissue is tested in a lab to look for cancer cells. chance or environmental factors later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation).
1584	You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Chemoradiation EBRT and chemotherapy are often used together to treat cervical cancer. They are given concurrently (during the same time period) in a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers. These cancers have grown beyond the cervix but have not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. As part of chemoradiation, there are typically 5 EBRT treatment sessions per week for 5 to 6 weeks. Chemotherapy is typically given once weekly during this time. See page 37 for more information on chemotherapy. Brachytherapy Also known as internal radiation therapy, brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. Brachytherapy allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount delivered to surrounding normal tissue. During brachytherapy, instruments are placed into the cervix, uterus, and vagina. A radioactive material then travels into the instruments that have been placed in the body. This method is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. Sometimes, additional instruments (catheters, or thin hollow tubes) are placed in the tumor itself or in tissues next to the tumor (interstitial brachytherapy).
1585	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
1586	Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots. If surgery first isn’t an option Having surgery first may not be an option. This could be due to the size or location of the tumor, other health conditions, or your overall health. In this case, chemotherapy is given first to shrink the cancer. You will need a biopsy to confirm that the tumor is ovarian cancer before starting chemotherapy. At this time, preferred regimens include: h Paclitaxel and carboplatin Paclitaxel, carboplatin, bevacizumab, and maintenance bevacizumab While the above regimens are preferred, there are other recommended options for chemotherapy. Your team will take into account any medical conditions and your overall health. These regimens may change as new information becomes available. After a few cycles of chemotherapy (2 to 3 months), your doctor will check to see how well chemotherapy worked and if surgery is an option. The goal of surgery is to remove as much of the cancer as possible, as well as the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus. Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS).
1587	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1588	Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs. Layers of the stomach wall The wall of the stomach is made up of 5 layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscle layer, subserosa, and serosa. Stomach cancer Most stomach (gastric) cancers start in the cells that line the inside of the stomach and make mucus. These are called adenocarcinomas. Almost all stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas. Adenocarcinomas of the stomach are the focus of this book. There are 2 major types of stomach adenocarcinomas. Intestinal – Cells of the intestinal type stick together and form tube- and glandshaped structures. This type is more likely to have mutations that can be treated with targeted therapy. Diffuse – Cells of the diffuse type don’t stick together and appear scattered over a wide area that can't be easily seen on the surface. This type is less common. Treatment is based on the type of stomach cancer and the location of the tumor.
1589	A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and help you interpret the results of these tests. Germline testing is recommended for those with prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others High-risk, very-high-risk, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Having any other type of cancer Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Molecular biomarker testing In biomarker testing, a sample from your biopsy is tested to look at its molecular components. This information helps figure out how likely your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. Biomarker testing can be considered for those with localized, regional, or metastatic prostate cancer. Biomarker testing is sometimes called genomic testing, tumor profiling, or molecular tumor testing. The main reason to have a molecular biomarker test is to help assess whether you have lower risk or higher risk prostate cancer.
1590	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
1591	Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin. It rarely spreads to the lining of the brain and spinal cord. Imaging tests can also show areas of infection or bleeding that may impact your care. A radiologist, a medical expert in interpreting imaging tests, will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You will likely not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is a substance used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. Contrast might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). Oral contrast does not get absorbed from your intestines and will be passed with your next bowel movements. IV contrast will leave the body in the urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do.
1592	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
1593	This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There is a subtype of HCC called fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHC). FLHC affects very few people and usually occurs at a younger age. The second most common type of primary liver cancer in adults is called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which is a cancer of the bile ducts. Other primary liver cancers in adults include rare types of sarcoma that start in the blood vessel cells of the liver. Another rare type is made of both hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. This is called a mixed-type tumor. More information on gallbladder and bile duct tumors is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. In the following pages, this patient guideline will focus on the most common type of liver cancer, HCC, and its treatment. How liver cancer spreads Liver cancer can spread in many ways. It can spread directly through the liver. It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone.
1594	Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy If cancer cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or if an MRI of the spine shows cancer, chemotherapy may be infused directly into the CSF in some cases. This is known as intrathecal or intra-CSF chemotherapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used in select cases or as part of specific treatment program for primary CNS lymphoma. Intraocular chemotherapy In rare cases, primary CNS lymphoma may occur in the eye. In these situations, the chemotherapy may be infused into a vein or directly into the eye. Possible side effects from intraocular chemotherapy include eye irritation, infection, inflammation, and cataracts. Cataracts can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Side effects of chemotherapy Like other therapies, the side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors. These include the drug, the dose, and the person. Chemotherapy, especially in high doses, may not be the right treatment for people who are frail or older. These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects.
1595	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
1596	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
1597	To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment. Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist to discuss the options before starting treatment. Fertility preservation is all about keeping your options open, whether you know you want to have children later in life or aren’t really sure at the moment. Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods.
1598	Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. Because cancer cells divide and multiply rapidly, they’re a good target for chemotherapy. But chemotherapy harms healthy cells, too. The damage to healthy cells can cause side effects. Treatment may include a single chemotherapy drug or a combination of drugs. A combination of drugs is sometimes chosen because the drugs work better when they’re used together. Most chemotherapy drugs for primary CNS lymphoma are given intravenously (IV). This means the medicine is slowly infused through a tube into a vein in your arm or another part of your body. The medicine travels in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Some chemotherapy drugs are taken by mouth as a tablet or capsule. Chemotherapy is given in cycles. One cycle involves a few treatment days followed by several days of rest. Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment.
1599	Intravesical BCG Intravesical BCG therapy uses a fluid that contains a very weak bacterium (germ). The germ triggers the immune system, causing the immune system to attack cancer cells inside the bladder. Intravesical BCG can lower the chance of recurrence (cancer coming back) or getting worse (invading bladder muscle). Intravesical BCG is commonly used for highgrade bladder cancer that hasn’t invaded the muscle layer. It’s usually started about 3 to 6 weeks after TURBT, to allow the bladder time to heal. It’s given once a week for 6 weeks. You should have a full re-evaluation at 12 weeks after starting treatment. To prevent recurrence, you might be asked to continue having intravesical BCG therapy. This is called maintenance therapy. Maintenance therapy involves three intravesical BCG treatments (given in one week) at 3 months and again at 6 months after TURBT. You may continue to have maintenance therapy every 6 months for up to 3 years, depending on the risk of recurrence. Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder.
1600	Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder. The medicine aims to destroy any cancer cells that TURBT left behind and to prevent any new cancer cells from forming. urinate, pain or difficulty when urinating, and blood or particles (clots) in your urine. Talk to your treatment team about the side effects. There may be ways to help lessen these effects. If intravesical BCG doesn’t work on its own, a number of other treatment options are available in addition to treatment in clinical trials. Ask your provider or another member of your care team about these potential options. Intravesical chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug used to kill actively growing cancer cells. Intravesical chemotherapy is given to treat the cancer and to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Intravesical chemotherapy can be given soon after a TURBT procedure. The treatment is a one-time dose instilled within 24 hours of TURBT surgery. It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing.
1601	It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing. Intravesical chemotherapy may also be an option if BCG is unavailable, or if you were given BCG therapy but it wasn’t effective. In these cases, it’s given on the same schedule as BCG therapy: once a week for 6 weeks, usually beginning 3 to 4 weeks after TURBT. Maintenance intravesical chemotherapy, if given, is usually on a monthly basis for 1 to 2 years. Because intravesical chemotherapy only goes into the bladder, not the entire body, it doesn’t usually cause the harsh side effects that chemotherapy is known for. However, it may cause the same type of side effects as intravesical BCG therapy. BCG shortage Even though BCG has been used for decades to treat bladder cancer, it’s been in short supply in the United States and worldwide for several years. As a result, many people with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer haven’t been able to receive this treatment or have received a reduced dose. Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it.
1602	NCCN.org/patients/feedback Treatment options for bladder cancer Surgery Intravesical therapy Systemic therapy Radiation therapy Clinical trials Supportive care Side effects of treatment Key points What’s your stage? This chapter explains the different treatment options for bladder cancer. Many people with bladder cancer receive more than one type of treatment. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that’s right for you. Treatment for bladder cancer is based on many things. This includes the extent, severity, and type of cancer. It also includes your age, your ability to perform daily tasks, your other health issues, and the availability and affordability of drugs. Importantly, treatment is also based on your wishes and preferences. There are several ways to treat bladder cancer. It’s likely that you’ll need a few different types of treatment over months or years. Treatments include: Surgery – The goal of surgery is to take out the tumor and sometimes the surrounding tissue. Surgery procedures range from snipping a single tumor from the bladder lining to removing the entire bladder and other organs. Intravesical therapy – Intravesical therapy involves filling the bladder with a liquid medication that helps destroy cancer cells.
1603	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
1604	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
1605	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
1606	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
1607	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
1608	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
1609	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases.
1610	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
1611	If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase 4 trials study the long-term safety and benefit of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health.
1612	You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others. Ask for the names and contact information of your care providers to be included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment may be improved if your primary care provider is involved. They can help manage other health conditions that may be affected by your cancer treatment. Your treatment plan There isn't one treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your care team agree on should be noted in the treatment plan, along with possible side effects. Keep in mind that your plan may change. Testing may provide new information. Your feelings about treatment may change. Side effects or other health conditions may prompt a change of plan. Key points The ovaries are a pair of grapesized organs in the pelvis. They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium.
1613	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
1614	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
1615	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1616	Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers.
1617	Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss. About kidney cancer The kidneys How the kidneys work Kidney cancer RCC subtypes How kidney cancer spreads Key points The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. The kidneys make hormones and filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. This chapter will discuss the kidneys and provide an overview of kidney cancer. The kidneys The kidneys are a pair of organs found behind the other organs in your abdomen. Each kidney is about the size of an adult’s fist. The kidney is covered by a thin layer of tissue, like the skin of an apple. This layer of tissue is called the renal capsule. Renal refers to the kidney. The kidneys are part of the urinary system. The urinary system is a group of organs that remove waste from the body in the form of urine (or pee). This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure.
1618	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1619	So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. Don’t fear the digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. Although it can be uncomfortable, it’s over in less than a minute. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is a procedure in which your doctor inserts a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. General health tests Health history Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1620	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
1621	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
1622	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
1623	They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion. Photodynamic therapy In photodynamic therapy (PDT), a lightsensitive drug is applied to the area. When exposed to light (either red or blue light in the doctor’s office, or shaded outdoor light), the drug becomes active and kills cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy A drug applied to the skin becomes active and kills cancer cells when exposed to light. Common side effects of PDT include itching or burning when the liquid is applied, pain during the red or blue light exposure, and itching and redness for a few days after treatment. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy (also called cryosurgery) freezes and destroys precancerous and cancerous cells using a very cold liquid or tool. Liquid nitrogen is often used. Cryotherapy sometimes causes a burning sensation during treatment. A blister and scab will form, which heals over 2 to 3 weeks. Skin darkening or lightening can happen while it is healing. Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses.
1624	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
1625	Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, the care team might include the following: h A diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, ultrasounds, and other imaging tests. An interventional radiologist performs needle biopsies and places intravenous (IV) ports for treatment. A pathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. A surgical oncologist performs operations to remove cancer. h A reconstructive (plastic) surgeon performs breast reconstruction, if desired, for those who undergo mastectomy. A medical oncologist treats cancer in adults using systemic therapy. h A radiation oncologist prescribes and delivers radiation therapy to treat cancer. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you do not feel pain during surgery or procedures. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant.
1626	This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), nivolumab (Opdivo), or ipilimumab (Yervoy) might be used for TMB-H tumors in some cases. Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your birth parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Mutation testing uses methods such as nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IDH1 mutation Some gene mutations such as IDH1 can be targeted with specific therapies such as ivosidenib (Tibsovo). Ivosidenib is for those with chondrosarcoma who are prone to have IDH1 mutations. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
1627	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1628	Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. In some cases, a sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins might be targeted with specific therapies. Smoking or heavy alcohol use will affect your treatment outcomes and increase treatment toxicity. It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer.
1629	Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins. This helps your immune system locate and then destroy the cancer cells. Rituximab is given through an IV infusion. Side effects of immunotherapy Rituximab and other immunotherapies may cause drowsiness, fatigue, constipation, joint pain, loss of appetite, low blood cell counts, serious blood clots, and rashes. Keep track of your symptoms and side effects Think about ways to keep track of your symptoms and side effects when they happen. You can make notes in a weekly diary, on a calendar, or in a smartphone app. Or create your own way to record the symptoms or side effects you experience. Some things to track include: Each treatment and any side effects it caused How long the side effect lasted How the side effect affected your quality of life If you’re given a treatment for a side effect, note how well the treatment worked Show this information to your treatment team at each visit. Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing.
1630	T0 – No tumor is found, but neck lymph nodes test positive for Epstein-Barr virus. Tis – This is carcinoma in situ, meaning that cancerous cells are found only in the squamous cell layer. T1 – Tumor is confined to the nasopharynx or has grown into the oropharynx and/or nasal cavity, but not into the parapharyngeal space. The parapharyngeal space is a triangular area near the pharynx (throat), between the base of the skull and the hyoid bone (the bone under the tongue). It is in the deep tissues of the neck and contains mostly fat, as well as blood vessels (including the carotid artery and jugular vein), nerves, lymph nodes, and parts of the salivary (spit) gland. T2 – Tumor has grown into parapharyngeal space, and/or nearby soft tissue (muscles such as the medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, and prevertebral muscles) Cervical cancer basics The cervix Cervical changes Risk factors Types of cervical cancer Key points Cervical cancer is a common cancer of the female reproductive system. Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection.
1631	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
1632	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
1633	Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda). Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves— such as x-rays—to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. The type of radiation therapy usually used for bladder cancer is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, a large machine aims radiation at the tumor area. Radiation therapy can be given alone but is more often given with other bladder cancer treatments: Chemoradiation Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are often used together to treat bladder cancer. When given together, they work better than they do alone. This is called chemoradiation or chemoradiotherapy. Like many cancer treatments, chemoradiation works better for certain people than for others. Trimodal therapy Trimodal therapy refers to a combination of three treatments: TURBT to remove all visible cancer, followed by radiation and chemotherapy given together (chemoradiation). In certain people with bladder cancer, trimodal therapy can be used instead of bladder removal surgery (radical cystectomy). This is why trimodal therapy is referred to as a "bladder preserving" treatment. Clinical trials Therapy may also be given as part of a clinical trial.
1634	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
1635	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
1636	A commonly used chemotherapy for bladder cancer is cisplatin, which contains the metal platinum. Platinum-based chemotherapy medicines can be effective against bladder cancer but can also damage the kidneys. People with kidney conditions or other health issues may not be able to have chemotherapy or, if possible, may receive non-platinum chemotherapy medicine. Chemotherapy is given in a sequence of treatments called a cycle. A cycle includes a period of treatments (such as once-a-day for a few days) followed by a time of rest (several days or weeks). This treatment cycle is then repeated a few times. For example, you might have 3 to 6 cycles of chemotherapy over 2 to 3 months. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic therapy that uses your immune system (your body’s natural defense against infection and disease) to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors are one type of immunotherapy used to treat bladder cancer and other cancers. Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer.
1637	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
1638	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
1639	Stage 2A2 cancers are larger than 4 cm. Stage 2B cancer has grown into the parametrium. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the cervix and uterus. Stages IIA1 and lIA2 Cervical Cancer Stage lIB Cervical Cancer Stage 3A cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the lower third of the vagina. Stage 3B cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the pelvic wall and/or has caused kidney swelling or dysfunction. Stage 3C cervical cancer There is cancer in lymph nodes near the cervix (pelvic lymph nodes) and/ or in lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic lymph nodes. Stage 4A cervical cancer The cancer has spread to nearby organs, such as the bladder or rectum. Stage 4B cervical cancer The cancer is metastatic. It has spread to the liver, lungs, abdomen, bone, or other distant sites or lymph nodes. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for cervical cancer often involves a team of experts, including a gynecologic oncologist, a medical oncologist, and a radiation oncologist. A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy.
1640	These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects. The main chemotherapy drug used to treat primary CNS lymphoma is high-dose methotrexate. Methotrexate is one of the most effective drugs for treating many kinds of cancers. But when given in high doses, methotrexate may cause damage to the kidneys, liver, and other organs. In severe cases, kidney failure is possible. To reduce this risk, you’ll have to stay at the hospital during methotrexate treatment and receive fluids through a vein in your arm. You may also be given medicine to reduce the toxicity of methotrexate and to prevent severe problems in your kidneys and other organs. Many cancer treatments, including chemotherapy, can lead to birth defects. So avoid becoming pregnant or getting someone pregnant while on chemotherapy treatment. Other side effects of chemotherapy include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mouth sores, loss of appetite, hair loss, low blood cell counts, What about side effects? A side effect is an unhealthy or unpleasant physical or emotional condition caused by treatment. Every treatment for primary CNS lymphoma can cause side effects.
1641	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1642	Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it.
1643	These check your kidney function. Liver function tests may also be ordered. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. This includes keeping alert for symptoms of cancer recurrence. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence This section discusses cervical cancer that does not improve with treatment (persistent) or that returns after treatment (recurrent). If your doctor suspects recurrence based on your symptoms or a physical exam, you will have imaging tests to check. This could include CT, PET, and/or MRI. Surgery to look inside the body (exploratory surgery) may be helpful in some cases. The goal is to learn the extent of the cancer. This can help guide treatment decisions. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Biomarkers are often mutations (changes) in particular genes. They can also be proteins that are made in response to the cancer. Biomarker testing is recommended for all recurrent cervical cancers. The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials.
1644	Side effects depend on many factors, especially the type of treatment (radiation versus chemotherapy, for example) and the length or the dose of treatment. Here are some common side effects of different treatments: Bladder removal surgery – bleeding, blood clots, kidney problems, infection, sexual dysfunction, incontinence, problems caused by the urinary diversion Intravesical therapy – swelling (inflammation) of the bladder lining, frequent urination, pain or burning feeling when urinating, blood in the urine, infection Chemotherapy – nausea, vomiting, extreme tiredness (fatigue), fever, infection, tingling or numbness, rash, diarrhea Immunotherapy – autoimmune reaction, fatigue, fever, nausea, loss of appetite, infection, diarrhea, constipation Not every patient develops nausea or vomiting from cancer therapy. But if you have these side effects, it’s important to reduce them as much as possible to prevent them from interfering with your treatment. Read more about these side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery.
1645	The contrast makes the lining of your kidneys, ureters, and bladder easier to see. You may have a urogram if you’re feeling symptoms such as pain in your side or back, or if you have blood in your urine. Renal ultrasound shows your kidneys, ureters, and bladder in real time. It’s the same technology used to look at a baby in the womb. A renal ultrasound is a painless, non-surgical test that produces black and white images of your kidneys and other organs. Pyelogram uses x-rays and contrast solution to look for a blockage—such as a tumor, kidney stone, or blood clot—in your ureters or kidneys. This test may also be used to find causes for blood in urine. A pyelogram is usually done in the operating room during a cystoscopy. You’ll be given anesthesia for this procedure. During the cystoscopy, the contrast is given intravenously (into a vein) or injected directly into the ureters. Tips for testing Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results.
1646	Stage 2A2 cancers are larger than 4 cm. Stage 2B cancer has grown into the parametrium. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the cervix and uterus. Stages IIA1 and lIA2 Cervical Cancer Stage lIB Cervical Cancer Stage 3A cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the lower third of the vagina. Stage 3B cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the pelvic wall and/or has caused kidney swelling or dysfunction. Stage 3C cervical cancer There is cancer in lymph nodes near the cervix (pelvic lymph nodes) and/ or in lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic lymph nodes. Stage 4A cervical cancer The cancer has spread to nearby organs, such as the bladder or rectum. Stage 4B cervical cancer The cancer is metastatic. It has spread to the liver, lungs, abdomen, bone, or other distant sites or lymph nodes. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for cervical cancer often involves a team of experts, including a gynecologic oncologist, a medical oncologist, and a radiation oncologist. A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy.
1647	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
1648	It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected.
1649	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
1650	Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting lymphocytes of your immune system. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. Lymphoblasts can crowd out other blood cells causing blood to not work as it should. Acute leukemias grow faster than chronic leukemias. In general, to be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 marrow cells are lymphoblasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of ALL is possible with less than lymphoblasts. ALL can be found in bone marrow, blood, and organs such as the testicles or the central nervous system. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts.
1651	Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching and affecting cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies can target and attack specific types of cancer cells. They are generally only used for thyroid cancers that: Can't be treated with surgery or RAI therapy Have returned after treatment Have spread to areas far from the neck (metastasized) and are continuing to grow The targeted therapies currently used for thyroid cancer are called kinase inhibitors. Most are capsules that you swallow. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy doesn't work well against most thyroid cancers.
1652	Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Therefore, becoming pregnant or having one's partner become pregnant during treatment should be avoided. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood.
1653	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
1654	How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers. You may be able to view the pathology report using an online patient portal, or you could ask for a copy. The report is used to plan your treatment. Your oncologist will review the results with you. Take notes and ask questions. What tests are needed for starting treatment? The tests used to provide care are listed in Guide 1 and are described next. Health history Expect your care team to review your health in detail. This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health.
1655	Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. This is called egg freezing or oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mismatch repair testing All colon cancers should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Testing for this biomarker involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Cancers that do not have these biomarkers are called microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). Family health history Inherited syndromes related to colon cancer include Lynch syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis. Everyone with colon cancer should be asked about their family health history.
1656	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma Biopsy and lab testing Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging tests Heart and lung tests Other testing and care Key points Questions to ask This chapter explains how Hodgkin lymphoma is identified (diagnosed). Other testing and care you may have before treatment is described. Biopsy and lab testing The best way to diagnose Hodgkin lymphoma is to have 1 or more whole lymph nodes removed and tested. This is called an excisional lymph node biopsy. While an excisional biopsy is preferred, a core needle biopsy may be done in some cases. In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node.
1657	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
1658	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1659	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
1660	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
1661	The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs.
1662	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
1663	This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen. A thin tube with a light and a camera (laparoscope) is used to view the lining of the abdomen and the surface of organs in the abdomen. Tissue samples are taken and tested for cancer cells in a lab. Biopsy To diagnose ovarian cancer, a sample of tissue must be removed from your body for testing. This is called a biopsy. The biopsy is usually done during initial surgery to remove the cancer. But sometimes a biopsy is done to diagnose ovarian cancer before surgery or other planned treatment. This may be the case if the cancer has spread too much to be removed by surgery initially and chemotherapy is needed first. In such cases, a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, core biopsy, or paracentesis may be used. FNA uses a very thin needle to remove a small sample of tissue from the tumor. A core biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle. For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing.
1664	Removing only a portion of the cervix may be an option for the earliest stage of cervical cancer. In most cases, however, the entire cervix must be removed. While this can sometimes be performed through the vagina, an abdominal incision (cut) is usually needed. When the surgery is performed through a traditional (big) incision through the abdomen, the approach is known as laparotomy. Minimally invasive (also called laparoscopic) surgery involves making only a few small cuts into your body. There is usually less pain and scarring compared to surgery that uses a larger cut through the abdomen. The time it takes to recover is also usually shorter. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped section of the cervix that includes tissue from both the ectocervix and endocervix. It is a recommended treatment option for some small cervical cancers. See Part 2: Testing and staging for more information on cone biopsy. Trachelectomy Trachelectomy is surgery to remove the cervix. The upper part of the vagina and pelvic lymph nodes may also be removed. Trachelectomy is a fertility-sparing surgery. The uterus and ovaries are left intact, allowing for the possibility of natural pregnancy in the future.
1665	Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes. Cervical cancer generally spreads to these nodes first. Lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic nodes, are also sometimes removed. Pre-treatment surgical staging If the cancer has spread beyond the cervix, a hysterectomy is not performed but pelvic and/ or para-aortic lymph nodes may be removed and tested before any treatment is given. Knowing whether pelvic or para-aortic nodes contain cancer can help guide treatment decisions for more advanced cancers. A minimally invasive approach is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is referred to as laparoscopic surgical staging. External beam radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. EBRT is given in small doses, called fractions. An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths.
1666	Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen. It is often an upand-down (vertical) cut from the top of the belly button down to the pelvic bone. This lets your doctor see the tumor and other organs and tissues in your abdomen and pelvis. This method is recommended most often when surgical staging (described next) or cytoreductive surgery is planned. Less often, a minimally invasive type of surgery called laparoscopy may be used. The surgery is performed through a few small cuts in the abdomen. Laparoscopy may be used in select cases, such as when cancer is only in the ovaries. This surgery should only be done by a gynecologic oncologist experienced in this method. Hysterectomy and BSO The most commonly used surgery for ovarian cancer removes the uterus, both ovaries, and both fallopian tubes. Surgical staging If it does not look like the cancer has spread, surgical staging should be performed. Surgical staging is the most accurate way to stage ovarian cancer. This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells.
1667	Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen. It is often an upand-down (vertical) cut from the top of the belly button down to the pelvic bone. This lets your doctor see the tumor and other organs and tissues in your abdomen and pelvis. This method is recommended most often when surgical staging (described next) or cytoreductive surgery is planned. Less often, a minimally invasive type of surgery called laparoscopy may be used. The surgery is performed through a few small cuts in the abdomen. Laparoscopy may be used in select cases, such as when cancer is only in the ovaries. This surgery should only be done by a gynecologic oncologist experienced in this method. Hysterectomy and BSO The most commonly used surgery for ovarian cancer removes the uterus, both ovaries, and both fallopian tubes. Surgical staging If it does not look like the cancer has spread, surgical staging should be performed. Surgical staging is the most accurate way to stage ovarian cancer. This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells.
1668	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
1669	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
1670	Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli. NSCLC is the most common lung carcinoma. Other lung carcinomas are neuroendocrine tumors. Information on lung neuroendocrine tumors can be found at Airways of the lungs The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into two airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus divides into smaller airways called the bronchioli. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. Oxygen is transferred from air into the blood in the alveoli. NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. There are several types of NSCLC Each type of NSCLC forms from a particular kind of cell. Below are common types of NSCLC: Adenocarcinoma (A-deh-noh-KAR-sihNOH-muh) often forms from cells that line the alveoli and make mucus. This is the most common type of NSCLC. Large cell carcinoma forms from any of the large cells that are found throughout the airways. Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC?
1671	The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach. After being broken down into a liquid, food enters the small intestine. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. Parts of the esophagus Esophagus wall The esophagus wall contains 4 layers: Mucosa – inner membrane that is in contact with food. It has 3 parts: Epithelium – innermost lining and is normally made up of flat, thin cells called squamous cells Lamina propria – thin layer of connective tissue under the epithelium Muscularis mucosa - very thin layer of muscle under the lamina propria Submucosa – layer of connective tissue just below the mucosa that contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. In some parts of the esophagus, this layer also includes glands that secrete mucus. Muscularis propria – thick layer of muscle under the submucosa. It contracts in a coordinated way to push food down the esophagus from the throat to the stomach (peristalsis). Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle.
1672	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
1673	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. Confirmed CSCC Once a diagnosis of CSCC is made, your doctor will follow up with: A complete head-to-toe skin exam to look for other lesions An exam of the lymph nodes Cancer cells can travel through blood and a fluid called lymph to form tumors in other parts of the body. Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures that are part of the body's immune system. Lymph nodes filter substances that travel through the lymphatic fluid. They contain lymphocytes (white blood cells) that help the body fight infection and disease. If your lymph nodes feel larger than they should be, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes (this is also called “nodal disease”). To find out, your doctor will use a needle biopsy to take a sample from the lymph node for testing. Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is referred to as “local” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC.
1674	Most NPCs start in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the nasopharynx. Normally, these are thin, flat cells and are similar to the top layer of skin and surface lining of some other parts of the body such as the lungs and esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of nasopharyngeal cancer and is the focus of this book. Cancer cells form a tumor called a primary tumor within the area of the nasopharynx, the part of the throat connecting the back of the nose (nasal cavity) to the back of the mouth (the pharynx). A tumor can grow into nearby tissue. Cancer cells often spread to lymph nodes in the neck, and less frequently to the lungs. It's often difficult to recognize nasopharyngeal cancer because the symptoms are similar to other less serious conditions. Also, many people with nasopharyngeal cancer don't have any symptoms until the cancer reaches an advanced stage. Nasopharyngeal cancer shouldn't be confused with other types of cancer that also affect the throat, such as laryngeal cancer and esophageal cancer. More information on esophageal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app.
1675	Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures. It is done while you are awake with a topical spray to make you more comfortable. Laryngoscopy and nasolaryngoscopy Laryngoscopy is an exam of the back of your throat, including your voice box (larynx) or behind your voice box (hypopharynx). It uses a laryngoscope, which is a thin, long tube fitted with a fiberoptic light. Your voice box contains your vocal cords and allows you to speak. A laryngoscope is used to look for tumors in the throat and voice box (larynx) and hypopharynx. Laryngoscopy may be done in different ways: Indirect laryngoscopy uses a small mirror held at the back of your throat. The doctor shines a light on the mirror to view the throat area. Medicine to numb the back of your throat may be used. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy (nasolaryngoscopy) uses a small flexible scope passed through your nose and into your throat. Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute.
1676	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
1677	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
1678	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
1679	Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship. Anal cancer survivors may experience both short- and long-term health effects of cancer and its treatment. These effects are different for everyone and depend on the treatment(s) received. Your primary care doctor After finishing cancer treatment, your primary care doctor, also known as a general practitioner (GP) or primary care physician (PCP), will play an important role in your care. Your oncologist (cancer doctor) and PCP should work together to make sure you get the follow-up care you need. Your oncologist will develop a written survivorship care plan that includes: A summary of your cancer treatment history, including surgeries, radiation treatments, and chemotherapy A description of possible short-term, late, and long-term side effects Recommendations for monitoring for the return of cancer Information on when your care will be transferred to your PCP Your primary care doctor Clear roles and responsibilities for both your cancer care team and your PCP Recommendations on your overall health and well-being Late and long-term side effects Some side effects of anal cancer treatment can linger longer than expected.
1680	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1681	In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed. Urine and stool are kept separate until they exit the body through the same stoma. Compared to having separate urinary and fecal diversions, DBWC has been found to have other benefits, such as fewer leaks. Metastatic cancer If left untreated, or if not diagnosed early, cervical cancer often spreads to the liver, lungs, and/or bone. Cervical cancer that has spread to these organs is metastatic. Cancer that had already metastasized when it was found is stage 4B. If cancer returns and metastasizes after treatment, it is known as a distant recurrence. The information in this section applies to both types of metastatic disease. Metastatic cervical cancer is very hard to cure. Treatment is usually with systemic therapy. The goal is to keep the cancer under control and prevent further spread. If the tumor has not already been tested for biomarkers, it may be tested now. Biomarker testing can help determine whether you may be eligible for certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies. It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below.
1682	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
1683	How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease.
1684	The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum).
1685	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
1686	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
1687	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
1688	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
1689	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
1690	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
1691	Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS). Cancer that returns to the neck If the cancer can be removed based on its size and location, surgery is the preferred treatment. For cancers that take up iodine, treatment with RAI therapy will also be considered. But, treatment isn't always needed. If the cancer isn't getting worse and isn't close to any critical structures, your provider may recommend close monitoring instead of treatment. If the cancer can't be removed with surgery, doesn’t take up iodine, and is getting worse (progressing), treatment with radiation therapy, targeted therapy, or both may be an option. The preferred targeted therapy for cancer that can’t be removed with surgery and is progressing is lenvatinib (Lenvima). Another recommended option is sorafenib (Nexavar). If the cancer gets worse after treatment with 1 or both of these, cabozantinib (Cabometyx) is recommended. For cancers with certain gene mutations or other features, biomarker-based therapy may also be an option for recurrence. See Guide 1 on the next page. If the therapies discussed above aren’t available or appropriate, joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged.
1692	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
1693	This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body. Skin lesions Basal cell skin cancer is often found on the face, head, and neck. Here is a basal cell lesion pictured on a person's cheek. Skin basics Did you know that your skin is your body’s largest organ and if you measured it it would stretch to about 20 square feet? Working as a barrier, your skin protects you from bacteria and chemicals and helps control your body temperature. It has 3 layers: Epidermis – The top layer of skin provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis – The middle layer involves connective tissue, blood vessels, oil and sweat glands, nerves, and hair follicles. Hypodermis – The deepest tissue layer is made up of fat and connective tissue. Most skin cancers form in the cells of the epidermis. It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis.
1694	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1695	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1696	If available, enrolling in a clinical trial for treatment is encouraged. If anal cancer metastasizes, it spreads most often to the liver or lungs. Metastatic anal cancer is treated first with platinum-based chemotherapy. This is called first-line therapy. Options recommended at this time include: Carboplatin and paclitaxel 5-FU, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) 5-FU, leucovorin, and cisplatin (FOLFCIS) Modified docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil (DCF) h 5-FU and cisplatin Ask your treatment team to explain: How often you need to receive chemotherapy How long you need to receive chemotherapy How chemotherapy treatment will be given (eg, intravenously, orally, infusion pump) After chemotherapy with certain regimens, treatment with chemoradiation may be given. The extent of the cancer will be re-checked when you have finished chemotherapy. This will help guide decisions about chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is generally not considered after chemotherapy with the modified DCF (docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil) regimen. If chemoradiation is planned, either 5-FU or capecitabine will be used for the chemotherapy portion. Side effects of chemotherapy The most common side effects of the chemotherapy regimens discussed above are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hair loss, and sores in the mouth and lining of the anus.
1697	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
1698	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
1699	A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia. However, these may not be the genetic changes you were born with. Therefore, a skin punch biopsy is used. In this procedure, a small piece of skin and connective tissue is removed to get DNA that hasn’t been altered by AML. This will be used to see if you inherited genes that increase your risk of leukemia. Leukemia predisposition syndrome can affect how your body responds to treatment. Blood and saliva can be used when AML cells disappear (in remission). Biological family members who are possible hematopoietic cell donors might be tested for leukemia predisposition syndrome. Testing of cells not affected by your leukemia (like skin) can help tell if you have a leukemia predisposition syndrome. AML mutation testing Mutation testing using methods such as karyotype (or cytogenetics), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), next-generation sequencing (NGS), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) look for changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells (genes and chromosomes).
1700	Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia.
1701	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
1702	The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. Brain CT scan A CT of the brain is used to look for bleeding. A CT or CAT (computed tomography) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Contrast may or may not be used. This is a very quick test. Brain MRI scan An MRI can show if the outer layer of the brain is swollen from leukemia (leukemic meningitis). An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test.
1703	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1704	This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy. It is needed lifelong in all people after total thyroidectomy. After a lobectomy, about 1 in 3 people need thyroid hormone therapy. Levothyroxine (eg, Levoxyl; Synthroid) is the most commonly used thyroid hormone replacement therapy. The goal for most people is to keep the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the low normal range. For higher risk thyroid cancers, or if there are signs of recurrence, the TSH level is kept lower than the normal range (suppressed). This helps prevent thyroid cancer cells from growing or returning. Suppression is an important part of cancer therapy for most differentiated thyroid cancers. Levothyroxine is taken as a pill once a day. It must be taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 mintutes prior to eating a meal. If not, it won't be adequately absorbed into the blood. Finding the right dose can take some trial and error. If the dose isn't optimal, common side effects include: Anxiety Trouble sleeping Racing heart (with or without an abnormal heartbeat) Sweating Blood tests are used to check the TSH level on a regular basis during thyroid replacement therapy.
1705	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
1706	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1707	Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone.
1708	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1709	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1710	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
1711	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
1712	Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests.
1713	Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as local/regional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on metastatic breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk.
1714	In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes. It might be helpful to know that these short-lived germinal centers are different than those found in some subtypes of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). There are 2 zones in the germinal center: light and dark. B cells in the light zone are called centrocytes. They are smaller, less in number, and divide less than B cells in the dark zone. B cells within the dark zone are called centroblasts. They are larger than the cells in the light zone and reproduce (divide) more. The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade, which then determines the stage. The stage tells if your cancer should be treated as classic FL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, transformed FL, or individualized. Grading The types of cells found in your FL help determine the grade. Grades include 1, 2, 3A, and 3B. Grade 3B contains only centroblasts (large cells), while the other grades contain mixtures of centrocytes (small cells) and centroblasts (large cells). The more centroblasts, the higher the grade.
1715	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
1716	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
1717	This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches. A wound might be left open (rather than being stitched together) and left to heal by itself, filling in and closing up naturally. This is called secondary intention healing. It could mean you will need regular dressings to the area for up to 6 weeks, but the full time to heal depends on the size, depth, and area of the wound. A linear closure is another common form of wound healing. The surgeon will cut a small amount of extra skin to change the shape of the wound from a circle to a fusiform (an oval that looks like a football) to help the surgeon stitch the wound together in a line. Other wounds may need skin grafts or other types of surgery (such as rearranging skin, known as “flapping”) to heal well and lessen scarring. A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area.
1718	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
1719	Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink.
1720	NCCN.org/patients/feedback Treatment options for bladder cancer Surgery Intravesical therapy Systemic therapy Radiation therapy Clinical trials Supportive care Side effects of treatment Key points What’s your stage? This chapter explains the different treatment options for bladder cancer. Many people with bladder cancer receive more than one type of treatment. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that’s right for you. Treatment for bladder cancer is based on many things. This includes the extent, severity, and type of cancer. It also includes your age, your ability to perform daily tasks, your other health issues, and the availability and affordability of drugs. Importantly, treatment is also based on your wishes and preferences. There are several ways to treat bladder cancer. It’s likely that you’ll need a few different types of treatment over months or years. Treatments include: Surgery – The goal of surgery is to take out the tumor and sometimes the surrounding tissue. Surgery procedures range from snipping a single tumor from the bladder lining to removing the entire bladder and other organs. Intravesical therapy – Intravesical therapy involves filling the bladder with a liquid medication that helps destroy cancer cells.
1721	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
1722	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
1723	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
1724	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1725	Family history Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin Examine your skeletal system Assess your ability to manage tasks and activities that are used in daily life called a functional assessment Fertility (all genders) Some types of treatment can affect your fertility, the ability to have children.
1726	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
1727	The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as remove toxins from the blood. Liver function tests measure enzymes that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. If you have not had a recent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test, or have never been tested, your doctor may recommend it. If you have HIV, you are likely to be referred to an HIV specialist. Having HIV should not affect your cancer treatment. The treatment options described in this guide apply to both HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients. Imaging Imaging helps determine the extent of the cancer. The size and spread of the cancer is used to guide treatment. Computed tomography You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest, abdomen, and/or pelvis. A CT scan is a more detailed kind of x-ray. It takes many pictures of an area inside the body from different angles. A computer combines the pictures to make three-dimensional (3-D) images. During the scan, you will lie face up on a table that moves through a large tunnel-like machine.
1728	It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is the focus of this book. Anything that increases your chances of developing liver cancer is called a risk factor. Screening is when tests are done on a regular basis to detect a disease in someone without symptoms. If you have cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B, then you should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program. Screening helps find disease early when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children.
1729	It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease.
1730	The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as remove toxins from the blood. Liver function tests measure enzymes that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. If you have not had a recent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test, or have never been tested, your doctor may recommend it. If you have HIV, you are likely to be referred to an HIV specialist. Having HIV should not affect your cancer treatment. The treatment options described in this guide apply to both HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients. Imaging Imaging helps determine the extent of the cancer. The size and spread of the cancer is used to guide treatment. Computed tomography You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest, abdomen, and/or pelvis. A CT scan is a more detailed kind of x-ray. It takes many pictures of an area inside the body from different angles. A computer combines the pictures to make three-dimensional (3-D) images. During the scan, you will lie face up on a table that moves through a large tunnel-like machine.
1731	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
1732	Some blood tests are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood. High levels of ALP can be a sign of bone tumors, liver disorders, or pregnancy. A bone scan might be performed if you have high levels of ALP. Complete blood count A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs) in your blood. RBCs carry oxygen throughout your body, WBCs fight infection, and PLTs control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. A CMP will look for higher than normal calcium levels in your blood called hypercalcemia. Calcium is needed for healthy teeth, bones, and other body tissues. Bone damage from cancer can cause your bones to release calcium into the bloodstream, which can lead to illness and other health issues. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fast-growing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
1733	Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing. Your oncologist will score your performance status based on your health history and exam. Blood tests Blood tests can measure blood cells, proteins, and chemicals in the bloodstream. If you haven’t had a blood test recently, you’ll get a complete blood count (CBC) with differential. A CBC measures parts of the blood including counts of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. h A differential counts the most common types of white blood cells in your blood. It also checks if the cell counts are in balance with each other. White blood cell counts are often high at diagnosis of CLL. Other blood counts, such as red blood cells or platelets, may be low. A comprehensive metabolic panel is a screening test for many diseases. It often includes tests for up to 14 chemicals in the blood. Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells.
1734	Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer.
1735	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1736	Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it.
1737	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1738	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
1739	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
1740	The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest. The lungs move important gases in and out of the blood. You breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide (a gas made by cells) from the body. The lungs have sections called lobes. The left lung has 2 lobes and the right lung has 3 lobes. A thin layer of tissue surrounds the lungs called the pleural membrane. This membrane protects the lungs. Two large breathing tubes, called bronchi, connect the windpipe (trachea) to the lungs. There is one tube, called a bronchus, for each lung. Inside the lungs are small tubes (bronchioles) and small air sacs (alveoli). The respiratory system The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood.
1741	There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. If you are looking for more information on breast cancer, read NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Ductal Carcinoma In Situ, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Invasive, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Breast Cancer – Metastatic, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines Early detection Breast cancer screening aims to find breast cancer early. Breast cancer found earlier is treated more successfully, reducing the risk of dying from breast cancer. This book will cover screening recommendations for those assigned female at birth.
1742	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
1743	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
1744	Key points Photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, and topical therapy are treatment options for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions). Types of surgery for squamous cell skin cancer include curettage and electrodesiccation, PDEMA/Mohs surgery, and standard surgical excision. Radiation therapy is a treatment option for people who cannot or choose not to have surgery. For the treatment of some squamous cell skin cancers, it is used after surgery to kill remaining cancer cells. Systemic therapy (eg, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy) is not used often for CSCC, except when it has spread elsewhere in the body. It may be an option if surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. Enrolling in a clinical trial is another option for treatment. Talk with your care team about seeing if you qualify for a clinical trial if one is available. 3 Local cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) 5 Risk assessment 7 Low-risk 8 High-risk or very high-risk 9 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is known as “local”. Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible.
1745	Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible. Risk assessment After squamous cell skin cancer is confirmed, your doctor will consider several features of the cancer to determine if it is a low-, high-, or very high-risk skin cancer. This is important to know because high- or very high-risk disease is treated differently than low-risk disease. A high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence. A very high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence and of metastasis (spread). The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. The following factors are used to determine your risk level. Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs.
1746	Capecitabine can cause a side effect known as hand-foot syndrome. Symptoms include redness, swelling, and pain on the palms of the hands, bottoms of feet, or both. Sometimes blisters appear. Your dose of capecitabine may be changed at the earliest signs of hand-foot syndrome. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 23 for next steps. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better: NCCN.org/patients/feedback Perianal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III perianal cancer. Stages I through III are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Like anal canal cancer, most perianal cancers are treated with chemoradiation. However, local excision (surgery) may be an option for some early-stage, low-risk perianal cancers. Local excision involves removing only the tumor and a small area of surrounding tissue. Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers.
1747	The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis.
1748	Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible. Risk assessment After squamous cell skin cancer is confirmed, your doctor will consider several features of the cancer to determine if it is a low-, high-, or very high-risk skin cancer. This is important to know because high- or very high-risk disease is treated differently than low-risk disease. A high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence. A very high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence and of metastasis (spread). The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. The following factors are used to determine your risk level. Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs.
1749	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. Confirmed CSCC Once a diagnosis of CSCC is made, your doctor will follow up with: A complete head-to-toe skin exam to look for other lesions An exam of the lymph nodes Cancer cells can travel through blood and a fluid called lymph to form tumors in other parts of the body. Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures that are part of the body's immune system. Lymph nodes filter substances that travel through the lymphatic fluid. They contain lymphocytes (white blood cells) that help the body fight infection and disease. If your lymph nodes feel larger than they should be, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes (this is also called “nodal disease”). To find out, your doctor will use a needle biopsy to take a sample from the lymph node for testing. Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is referred to as “local” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC.
1750	They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses. A research team helps to collect research data and coordinate care if you are in a clinical trial. Clinical trials help bring new therapies to patients and advance the treatment for everyone. Consider asking your care team about access to clinical trials. Your physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing are important. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need What is working and what is not Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Treatment overview Inflammatory breast cancer is treatable. Treatment can be local, systemic, or usually a combination of both. Local therapy focuses on the breast, chest wall, and lymph node area. It includes: Mastectomy (surgery) Radiation therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body.
1751	Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads outside the prostate to other parts of the body is called metastatic prostate cancer. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate gland. It usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. This is also called localized prostate cancer. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has grown outside the prostate and may have spread to other areas in the body such as lymph nodes (bottom left), bones, or organs like the liver or lungs (bottom right). This is also called metastatic prostate cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Early-stage prostate cancer is highly treatable and often curable. The earlier that prostate cancer is diagnosed and treated, the more likely that a patient will live without cancer. Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives.
1752	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Locally advanced cancer This section describes treatment options for cervical cancer that has grown beyond the cervix but has not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. Cancers that are close to spreading beyond the cervix (stage 1B3) are also considered locally advanced. Locally advanced cancers are not metastatic. The information in this section applies to the following stages: Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 2B Stage 3 Stage 4A Locally advanced cancers are more likely to have spread to lymph nodes than early-stage cancers. Knowing whether lymph nodes in the pelvis or abdomen contain cancer can help guide treatment with EBRT for these cancers. You may have extra imaging to look for lymph nodes with cancer. Another approach is to surgically remove and test lymph nodes before any treatment is given. A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging.
1753	Brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. It delivers a high dose of radiation directly to the tumor. Systemic therapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are most often used for recurrent and/or metastatic cervical cancer with specific biomarkers. Chemoradiation EBRT and platinum-based chemotherapy given concurrently (during the same time period) is a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Clinical trials Clinical trials give people access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the FDA. 4 Treatment for common types Fertility-sparing treatment Early-stage cancer Locally advanced cancer Surveillance Recurrence Metastatic cancer Key points This chapter presents recommended treatment options for the most common types of cervical cancer. Surgery is usually recommended for earlystage cancers, while most locally advanced cancers are treated with chemoradiation. This section applies to the following types of cervical cancer: Squamous cell carcinoma Adenocarcinoma Adenosquamous carcinoma Treatment is based on the cancer stage. The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI).
1754	Some anal cancers take longer to respond to treatment than others. It may be safe to monitor the cancer for as long as 6 months after treatment to see if there is improvement. Waiting to see if the cancer improves may avoid the need for surgery to remove the anus. If the cancer does not go into complete remission or gets worse, see “Progressive disease” below. If the cancer goes into remission, surveillance as described above under “Complete remission” is started. Progressive disease If the follow-up examination 8 to 12 weeks after treatment finds that the cancer has progressed, a biopsy will be performed to be certain. If biopsy results confirm progression, the next step is imaging. Imaging can show if the cancer is limited to the anal area (locally progressive) or whether it has spread to areas far from the pelvis (metastatic disease). See page 26 for information on the treatment of metastatic anal cancer. Treatment for locally progressive anal cancer is similar to recurrent non-metastatic anal cancer. Surgery to remove the anus is recommended. See Recurrence on the next page for more information. Before proceeding with surgery, your doctor may recommend trying immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor.
1755	The removed tissue is examined by a specialized doctor called a pathologist. A pathologist is a doctor who specializes in evaluating cells and tissues to diagnose disease. The pathologist looks for abnormal areas, including areas of cancer or pre-cancer. The pathologist also determines the type of cervical cancer, when possible. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy can be both a test and a treatment. It may be used to gather more information about the extent of the cancer after a cervical biopsy. It is also a recommended treatment option for some early cervical cancers. Also known as cervical conization, cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped portion of the cervix. The cone-shaped sample includes tissue from both the ectocervix and the endocervical canal. All of the transformation zone—where the ectocervix and endocervix meet—is removed. Most cervical cancers start in this area. Most commonly, a technique called cold knife conization (CKC) is used. In this method a surgical scalpel is used to remove the tissue. In some cases loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) may be performed instead. In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue.
1756	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
1757	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
1758	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
1759	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
1760	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
1761	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
1762	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
1763	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
1764	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1765	Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing. This can help your providers know how to manage your symptoms better. Stem cell rescue A stem cell is a basic cell that can develop into any kind of cell. Stem cells that become blood cells are called hematopoietic stem cells. Hematopoietic means “blood-forming.” Blood-forming stem cells are made in the bone marrow. But cancer and its treatment can damage and destroy cells in the bone marrow. When hematopoietic stem cells are damaged, they may not supply all the blood cells that the body needs. A stem cell rescue is a way to jumpstart the bone marrow to make more healthy blood cells. Also called a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, stem cell rescue uses your own blood-forming stem cells to regrow your bone marrow. A stem cell rescue has 3 key steps: h Stem cell removal – First, some of your healthy stem cells will be removed from your blood or bone marrow. You may need a few visits to collect enough stem cells. These collected stem cells are then frozen and stored for later.
1766	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1767	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
1768	The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow. It can be tied to several factors: Older adults tend to develop changes or mutations that could cause cancer like CLL to form over time Blood relatives of someone with CLL can have a higher chance of getting CLL themselves Lymph system Many B cells are in the lymph (or lymphatic) system. This system plays a key role in fighting infections. The tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph vessels and nodes are parts of the lymph system (shown). There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body, and many are in the neck, armpits, and groin. How is CLL treated? Treatment of CLL depends on your body. You may not need treatment right away. But treatment may be needed if your white blood cell count is rising rapidly, if you have low numbers of other normal blood cells (anemia, low platelets, or low neutrophils), if you have large or uncomfortable lymph nodes, or if you have symptoms listed above. Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed.
1769	The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow. It can be tied to several factors: Older adults tend to develop changes or mutations that could cause cancer like CLL to form over time Blood relatives of someone with CLL can have a higher chance of getting CLL themselves Lymph system Many B cells are in the lymph (or lymphatic) system. This system plays a key role in fighting infections. The tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph vessels and nodes are parts of the lymph system (shown). There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body, and many are in the neck, armpits, and groin. How is CLL treated? Treatment of CLL depends on your body. You may not need treatment right away. But treatment may be needed if your white blood cell count is rising rapidly, if you have low numbers of other normal blood cells (anemia, low platelets, or low neutrophils), if you have large or uncomfortable lymph nodes, or if you have symptoms listed above. Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed.
1770	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
1771	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
1772	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
1773	Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye. While both blue light cystoscopy and narrow-band imaging may potentially detect tumors better than standard white light, they’re relatively new and still in the “testing phase.” More research will show whether they can replace or be used with white light as the standard detection method. Types of imaging include x-rays, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound. CT scan A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a series of cross-sectional images. To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have a CT scan of your abdomen and pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the lower abdomen located between the hip bones; it contains reproductive organs as well as the bladder and rectum. A CT scanner is a large machine that has a tunnel in the middle. During the test, you’ll lie on a table that moves slowly through the tunnel. Pillows or straps may be used to help keep you still during the test.
1774	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
1775	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
1776	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
1777	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
1778	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
1779	If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. The possible grades are 1, 2, or Cervical dysplasia becomes cancer when the abnormal cells invade the muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining (the cervical stroma). An area of dysplasia or cancer is also referred to as a lesion. Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Cervical changes Cervical dysplasia refers to areas of abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. Lowgrade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors may develop cervical cancer, while others with risk factors may not. HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI).
1780	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
1781	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
1782	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
1783	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
1784	There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there can be more than one sentinel lymph node. Removal of the sentinel lymph nodes during surgery is called a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB or SNB). This procedure is done during surgery such as a mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) or lumpectomy (surgery to remove the tumor) to determine if any cancer cells have traveled to the lymph nodes. The lymph nodes removed are called the sentinel nodes. They may or may not contain any cancer cells. Just because these nodes are removed, it does not mean that they are positive for cancer. To find the sentinel lymph nodes, a radioactive material and other dyes are injected into the area where breast tumor is located. From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes.
1785	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
1786	Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? Early and locally advanced lung cancers have not spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs. The difference between early and locally advanced cancer is mainly based on the cancer stage. Cancer stages 1, 2, and 3 A cancer stage describes the extent of lung cancer in the body. The main stages of NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Early and Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 2024 Cancers that have spread to the lungs are not lung cancers. For example, stomach cancer that has spread to the lungs is still stomach cancer. lung cancer are often written with Roman numerals—stages I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). We will be listing stages as 1, 2, 3, and 4 to make the stages easier to read. At diagnosis, stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 cancers have grown from the airway into lung tissue. Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced.
1787	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1788	Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes. In addition to providing color, melanin also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the chances of getting a disease. For example, smoking cigarettes is a risk factor for developing lung cancer. The major risk factors for squamous cell skin cancer are described next. Sunlight/outdoor tanning Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over the course of many years, especially in people who sunburn easily. People with light skin, hair, and eyes who have been in the sun very often throughout their lives are at the highest risk for squamous cell skin cancer. People who work outdoors are also at higher risk. Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun.
1789	Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? What’s the best treatment? Key points If you’re reading this, you or someone you care for might have non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It’s the most common type of lung cancer. In this chapter, you’ll learn what this type of cancer is and what it means if it’s early or locally advanced. What is NSCLC? Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a type of lung cancer. Another type of lung cancer is small cell lung cancer, but it is a different cancer covered in another book. Lung cancer cells grow out of control. They don’t die when they should and make many new cancer cells, which become tumors. Lung cancer cells also don’t stay in place. They can break away from a tumor, spread outside the lung, and form more tumors. NSCLC is a type of lung carcinoma Almost all lung cancers are carcinomas (karsin-OH-mas). Lung carcinomas form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways inside the lungs are the bronchi, bronchioli, and alveoli.
1790	Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer. When nodules are found by imaging, you may receive more scans to assess if the nodule is cancer. If the nodule is unlikely cancer, your team may refer you for lung cancer screening. Lung cancer screening is for people at high risk for lung cancer. Information on lung cancer screening is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Risk for lung cancer Anyone can get lung cancer, but some people are more at risk. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of lung cancer. Risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Some people with many risk factors never get lung cancer. Some people with no risk factors do get lung cancer. Experts are still learning why one person gets lung cancer and another does not. Tobacco smoke The biggest risk factor for lung cancer is smoking tobacco. There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke.
1791	If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture.
1792	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
1793	Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are.
1794	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
1795	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
1796	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
1797	Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer. When nodules are found by imaging, you may receive more scans to assess if the nodule is cancer. If the nodule is unlikely cancer, your team may refer you for lung cancer screening. Lung cancer screening is for people at high risk for lung cancer. Information on lung cancer screening is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Risk for lung cancer Anyone can get lung cancer, but some people are more at risk. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of lung cancer. Risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Some people with many risk factors never get lung cancer. Some people with no risk factors do get lung cancer. Experts are still learning why one person gets lung cancer and another does not. Tobacco smoke The biggest risk factor for lung cancer is smoking tobacco. There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke.
1798	Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are.
1799	Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are.
1800	They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration. Lung cancers form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The lungs' airways are called the bronchus, bronchioli, and alveoli. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. They break the rules of cell growth. Cancer cells make many new cancer cells. They also do not die when they should. This overgrowth of cancer cells becomes a mass of tissue called a tumor. Cancer cells grow out of control. They can grow through the airway and into the lung tissue. They can grow through the lung wall and invade other body parts. Cancer cells can break away from a tumor and spread. They can enter the bloodstream or a fluid called lymph and spread to other places. This out-of-control cell growth can harm the body. Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer.
1801	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
1802	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
1803	Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow.
1804	Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed. If the results suggest that the cancer was not completely removed, you may have another cone biopsy. Or, your doctor may recommend radical trachelectomy. For stage 1A1 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation should also be performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1A2 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1A2 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 centimeters, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is performed in addition to the cone biopsy. For stage 1A2 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1B1 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1B1 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met.
1805	If surgery is not an option If you cannot have surgery, a discussion between different cancer doctors to consider your treatment options is recommended. If you can have it, radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy is recommended. Platinumbased chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may damage healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. If you are eligible, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is preferred. Enrolling in a clinical trial may also be an option. A clinical trial could involve treatment with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. If you are not eligible for an immune checkpoint inhibitor or a clinical trial, options for systemic therapy include platinum-based chemotherapy and targeted therapy.  See Part 6: When treatment is over for information on monitoring and follow-up care. Metastatic squamous cell skin cancer Cancer cells can spread through blood and lymph to form tumors in other areas of the body. This is called metastasis. Squamous cell skin cancer does not metastasize often. For this reason, there is not much research on the best way to treat metastatic squamous cell skin cancer.
1806	Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer. Imaging scans will also be done if cancer goes deeper into the skin or has spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph fluid to form tumors in other parts of the body. If spread to lymph nodes is suspected, your doctor will do a lymph node biopsy. 2 Types of treatments Who is on my care team? Superficial treatments Surgery Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points This chapter describes the types of treatment you may have for squamous cell skin cancer. The best treatment for you will depend on the extent of the cancer, whether surgery is a suitable option, and your personal preferences. Not everyone will receive the same treatment. Who is on my care team? After being diagnosed with squamous cell skin cancer, knowing what to do next can be confusing. Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care.
1807	Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. 2 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma Biopsy and lab testing Health history and physical exam Blood tests Imaging tests Heart and lung tests Other testing and care Key points Questions to ask This chapter explains how Hodgkin lymphoma is identified (diagnosed). Other testing and care you may have before treatment is described. Biopsy and lab testing The best way to diagnose Hodgkin lymphoma is to have 1 or more whole lymph nodes removed and tested. This is called an excisional lymph node biopsy. While an excisional biopsy is preferred, a core needle biopsy may be done in some cases. In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node.
1808	They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses. A research team helps to collect research data and coordinate care if you are in a clinical trial. Clinical trials help bring new therapies to patients and advance the treatment for everyone. Consider asking your care team about access to clinical trials. Your physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing are important. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need What is working and what is not Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Treatment overview Inflammatory breast cancer is treatable. Treatment can be local, systemic, or usually a combination of both. Local therapy focuses on the breast, chest wall, and lymph node area. It includes: Mastectomy (surgery) Radiation therapy Systemic therapy works throughout the body.
1809	Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer. Imaging scans will also be done if cancer goes deeper into the skin or has spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph fluid to form tumors in other parts of the body. If spread to lymph nodes is suspected, your doctor will do a lymph node biopsy. 2 Types of treatments Who is on my care team? Superficial treatments Surgery Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points This chapter describes the types of treatment you may have for squamous cell skin cancer. The best treatment for you will depend on the extent of the cancer, whether surgery is a suitable option, and your personal preferences. Not everyone will receive the same treatment. Who is on my care team? After being diagnosed with squamous cell skin cancer, knowing what to do next can be confusing. Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care.
1810	Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body. Your provider will consider the following factors to help decide if RAI may be helpful: The size of the tumor The tumor subtype Whether the cancer invaded lymph or blood vessels Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes The thyroglobulin (Tg) level after surgery Age at diagnosis RAI therapy is usually recommended if any of the following is true: The cancer had spread significantly beyond the thyroid The cancer had invaded blood vessels (applies to follicular and oncocytic tumors) The Tg level was high 6 to 12 weeks after surgery There were large, or more than 5, lymph nodes with cancer The tumor is a differentiated high-grade carcinoma Monitoring and follow-up care Follow-up testing and surveillance are somewhat different after lobectomy versus after total thyroidectomy. After total thyroidectomy Short-term follow-up after total thyroidectomy involves a physical exam and blood tests. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page.
1811	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
1812	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1813	Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN1 or cMIn mouth cancer, the clinical stage is based on imaging and biopsy results. These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery.
1814	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
1815	A potential benefit of lobectomy is that thyroid hormone replacement therapy may not be needed. Or, a lower dose may be needed. Papillary thyroid cancer Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common of all the thyroid cancers. The most common subtype is “classic type.” Other subtypes that may grow and spread more quickly include: Follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer Tall-cell/columnar cell Hobnail Diffuse sclerosing Is surgery always needed? Some small papillary tumors (no bigger than a pea) may be safely monitored without surgery. This approach is known as active surveillance. The size of the cancer is monitored using ultrasound. For active surveillance to be an option, there also can't be any nearby lymph nodes suspicious for cancer, and the tumor can't be in a high-risk location (such as the back of the thyroid, butting up against the trachea). Thyroidectomy or lobectomy? If surgery is needed, either a total thyroidectomy or lobectomy is performed. Some papillary cancers should always be treated with total thyroidectomy. A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas.
1816	Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have. Treatment Surgery is recommended to treat squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Surgery for regional CSCC involves excision (removal) of the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Although surgery is preferred, it may not be an option for one or more reasons. In this case, see If surgery is not an option below for information. If surgery is very risky or might not completely remove your cancer, your doctor may suggest immunotherapy with cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo) first. It may shrink the tumor and make surgery less risky. Head and neck tumors Lymph nodes may be removed from one or both sides of the neck during surgery for head and neck tumors. The extent of surgery depends on the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. After surgery, radiation therapy is often given to decrease the chance of the tumor returning. Systemic therapy is sometimes used in addition to radiation therapy after surgery.
1817	The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow. It can be tied to several factors: Older adults tend to develop changes or mutations that could cause cancer like CLL to form over time Blood relatives of someone with CLL can have a higher chance of getting CLL themselves Lymph system Many B cells are in the lymph (or lymphatic) system. This system plays a key role in fighting infections. The tonsils, thymus, spleen, and lymph vessels and nodes are parts of the lymph system (shown). There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body, and many are in the neck, armpits, and groin. How is CLL treated? Treatment of CLL depends on your body. You may not need treatment right away. But treatment may be needed if your white blood cell count is rising rapidly, if you have low numbers of other normal blood cells (anemia, low platelets, or low neutrophils), if you have large or uncomfortable lymph nodes, or if you have symptoms listed above. Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed.
1818	Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. As lymph travels throughout your body, it passes through hundreds of small beanshaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes make immune cells that help the body fight infection. They also filter the lymph fluid and remove foreign material such as bacteria and cancer cells. Lymphocytes Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer of lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell that helps fight and prevent infection. Lymphocytes are found in blood and lymph tissue, and every organ in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Germinal centers Follicular lymphoma (FL) starts in the temporary germinal centers (GCs) of lymph nodes. These germinal centers are short-lived structures that form in response to infection or inflammation. When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies.
1819	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
1820	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
1821	If your care team tells you that you have this, we advise you to read that chapter. Lymphatic system Lymphocytes Primary cutaneous lymphomas Key points Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) starts in B cells, a type of white blood cell called a lymphocyte. These cells make antibodies to fight infections and are an important part of the lymphatic system. CBCL appears as a nodule under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Lymphatic system Lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer. It affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic or lymph system is a major part of the body’s immune system. It is a germfighting network of tissues and organs that includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels. Lymphatic vessels are a network of thin tubes that carry lymphatic fluid (lymph) and white blood cells into all the tissues of the body. Lymph gives cells water and food. White blood cells, such as lymphocytes, help fight infection and disease. Lymphatic system The lymphatic or lymph system is part of the immune system. It includes lymph vessels, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow.
1822	Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers. When viewed under a microscope, Hodgkin lymphoma cells look different than other lymphomas. The lymphocytes are abnormally large and may have more than one nucleus. These oversized lymphocytes are called ReedSternberg cells. The focus of this resource is Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. Information on Hodgkin lymphoma in children and adolescents is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What is the lymphatic system? The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. It helps your body fight infection and disease. The tissues and organs that make up the lymphatic system are described next. They are made mostly of lymphocytes. There are other types of white blood cells, but lymphocytes are the most important to understanding Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymph and lymphatic vessels There is a super-highway of ducts running through your body. These ducts are called lymphatic vessels. Much like how blood vessels transport blood, lymphatic vessels transport lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid.
1823	Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers. When viewed under a microscope, Hodgkin lymphoma cells look different than other lymphomas. The lymphocytes are abnormally large and may have more than one nucleus. These oversized lymphocytes are called ReedSternberg cells. The focus of this resource is Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. Information on Hodgkin lymphoma in children and adolescents is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What is the lymphatic system? The lymphatic system is part of your immune system. It helps your body fight infection and disease. The tissues and organs that make up the lymphatic system are described next. They are made mostly of lymphocytes. There are other types of white blood cells, but lymphocytes are the most important to understanding Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymph and lymphatic vessels There is a super-highway of ducts running through your body. These ducts are called lymphatic vessels. Much like how blood vessels transport blood, lymphatic vessels transport lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid.
1824	This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA. Testing after diagnosis After a biopsy confirms anal squamous cell carcinoma, more testing is needed to plan treatment. Digital rectal exams are repeated. This section describes additional recommended testing after diagnosis. Lymph node exam There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes in the body. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Certain areas of the body contain more lymph nodes than others. The groin (where the thigh meets the abdomen) is one such area. Lymph nodes in the groin are called the inguinal lymph nodes. If left untreated, anal cancer cells can travel through lymphatics or blood to these groin lymph nodes or other lymph nodes in the pelvis, and then to other areas of the body. Lymph nodes cannot usually be seen or felt in the early stages of cancer, but may become enlarged as cancer progresses. Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation.
1825	Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting lymphocytes of your immune system. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. Lymphoblasts can crowd out other blood cells causing blood to not work as it should. Acute leukemias grow faster than chronic leukemias. In general, to be diagnosed with ALL, 20 percent or more lymphoblasts must be present in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 marrow cells are lymphoblasts. In certain cases, a diagnosis of ALL is possible with less than lymphoblasts. ALL can be found in bone marrow, blood, and organs such as the testicles or the central nervous system. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts.
1826	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
1827	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
1828	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
1829	The NCCN Guidelines are a work in progress that may be redefined as often as new significant data become available. NCCN makes no warranties of any kind whatsoever regarding its content, use, or application and disclaims any responsibility for its application or use in any way. NCCN Foundation seeks to support the millions of patients and their families affected by a cancer diagnosis by funding and distributing NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN Foundation is also committed to advancing cancer treatment by funding the nation’s promising doctors at the center of innovation in cancer research. For more details and the full library of patient and caregiver resources, visit NCCN.org/patients. About Hodgkin lymphoma What is lymphoma? What is the lymphatic system? Types of Hodgkin lymphoma 8 What can you do to get the best care? Hodgkin lymphoma is a highly curable cancer that usually starts in lymph nodes in the upper body. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 15 to 30, or after age What is lymphoma? Lymphoma is cancer that begins when white blood cells called lymphocytes grow out of control. Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers.
1830	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
1831	Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Philadelphia chromosome Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places.
1832	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
1833	A chromosome translocation is the switching of part of one chromosome with another chromosome within the lymphoma cells. Uncommon FL When FL has uncommon pathologic (disease) features or is t(14;18)-negative, it might be called uncommon FL (uFL). It is treated as classic FL in this book. Pediatric-type FL Pediatric-type FL (PTFL) usually occurs in children but can also occur in adults. Usually, only one lymph node is enlarged in the head and neck region and there might be no symptoms. Transformed FL FL can transform into a more aggressive lymphoma called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). This means your slowgrowing FL has turned into a large-cell, fastgrowing lymphoma. Transformed FL can occur before, during, or after treatment. In DLBCL, tumors are commonly found in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other tissues and organs. Key points The lymphatic or lymph system is a network of tissues and organs that helps your body fight infections and disease. It is part of the immune system. h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation.
1834	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
1835	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
1836	How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites. Cancer cells in lymph or blood vessels If there are cancer cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels outside of the main tumor, it means that the cancer is more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes and other parts of the body. This is known as lymphovascular invasion. Weakened immune system People with a weakened immune system have a higher risk of getting CSCC, and they are at higher risk of cancer returning after treatment. Examples of conditions that weaken the immune system include long-term corticosteroid use, having human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, or having received an organ transplant. Low-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) or shave excision Standard surgical excision Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA If you are not a candidate for surgery, treatment with radiation therapy is recommended if you can have it.
1837	The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI). LVSI means that there are tumor cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels inside the tumor. Cancers with LVSI are more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes. Nearby lymph nodes are more likely to be removed. Fertility-sparing treatment Surgical treatment for early-stage cervical cancer often involves surgery that removes the uterus (hysterectomy). Carrying a pregnancy is not possible after a hysterectomy. If the cancer has not spread beyond the cervix (stage 1), fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. If fertility-sparing treatment is being considered, ask your doctor about getting the opinion of a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. A fertility-sparing approach is not appropriate for some uncommon types of cervical cancer. Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed.
1838	Brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. It delivers a high dose of radiation directly to the tumor. Systemic therapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are most often used for recurrent and/or metastatic cervical cancer with specific biomarkers. Chemoradiation EBRT and platinum-based chemotherapy given concurrently (during the same time period) is a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Clinical trials Clinical trials give people access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the FDA. 4 Treatment for common types Fertility-sparing treatment Early-stage cancer Locally advanced cancer Surveillance Recurrence Metastatic cancer Key points This chapter presents recommended treatment options for the most common types of cervical cancer. Surgery is usually recommended for earlystage cancers, while most locally advanced cancers are treated with chemoradiation. This section applies to the following types of cervical cancer: Squamous cell carcinoma Adenocarcinoma Adenosquamous carcinoma Treatment is based on the cancer stage. The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI).
1839	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
1840	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
1841	In some cases, positron emission tomography (PET) may be combined with a CT or MRI. CT, MRI, and PET are described below. CT takes many pictures of areas inside of the body using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make one detailed picture. The picture is saved for later viewing by a radiologist. You will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. A substance called contrast will be used to make the pictures clearer. Before the CT scan, you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent may also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, serious allergic reactions occur. Tell your doctors if you have had bad reactions to contrast in the past. You will be alone during the scan, but a technician will be right outside the room. You may hear buzzing or clicking during the scan. MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body.
1842	The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. Brain CT scan A CT of the brain is used to look for bleeding. A CT or CAT (computed tomography) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Contrast may or may not be used. This is a very quick test. Brain MRI scan An MRI can show if the outer layer of the brain is swollen from leukemia (leukemic meningitis). An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test.
1843	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
1844	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
1845	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core.
1846	The cancer cells crowd out and overpower normal cells. This can end up harming the body. Cancer cells survive much longer than normal cells do. They can replace many normal cells and cause organs to stop working well. Cancer cells can also spread outside the prostate to other areas of the body. The prostate gland is an important part of the male reproductive system. It’s located in the pelvis just below the bladder and is about the size of a ping-pong ball. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? A symptom is a feeling or problem that can indicate a disease or condition. Prostate cancer often grows slowly and shows no symptoms for a long time. But you don’t have to have symptoms to have prostate cancer. In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer.
1847	Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. Sometimes, the sample is taken straight to the neuropathologist while you’re still in the operating room. The neuropathologist will perform an analysis right away and send the results back to the neurosurgeon. The results will say whether the tumor is malignant (cancerous) or benign (not cancerous). The results may also include the preliminary diagnosis, including the type and grade of the glioma. Knowing the preliminary diagnosis during your surgery helps the neurosurgeon to decide how much of the tumor to remove. The neuropathologist will also do molecular (genetic) testing, which indicates the type and growth rate of your glioma and other specific features. All this information will help your treatment team figure out the best treatment plan for you. If your hospital or medical center doesn’t have a neuropathologist, you can ask to have your biopsy sent to one. Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose a glioma tumor. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor.
1848	Gliomas can be challenging to treat, but treatment is improving. What is a glioma? A glioma is a type of tumor that grows in the brain. A tumor is an abnormal growth of cells. Gliomas develop from certain brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells support the function of nerve cells (neurons) in the central nervous system (the brain and the spinal cord). Many types of tumors can occur in the central nervous system. Only those that start as glial cells become gliomas. Gliomas are the most common type of malignant (cancerous) brain tumor in adults. Gliomas can happen at any age but occur more often in adults than in children. Gliomas start in the brain or sometimes the spinal cord. But they rarely spread to another area of the body. What makes gliomas so complicated is that they invade and blend into the normal parts of the brain. So gliomas can be very difficult to treat without harming the healthy parts of the brain. Normal cells vs. cancer cells Normal cells follow the body’s rules. Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules.
1849	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
1850	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
1851	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
1852	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
1853	Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s). Diagnostic mammograms include extra compression in certain areas of the breast, magnification views, or rolling the breast to image additional areas of the breast. Other tests may include a breast MRI or ultrasound. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist if you have any metal in your body. During the test, you will likely be asked to hold your breath for 10 to 20 seconds as the technician collects the images. Contrast is often used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it.
1854	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
1855	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1856	How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease.
1857	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
1858	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
1859	Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. In locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer, cancer has invaded the second layer (submucosa) of the stomach or beyond. Cancer might be found in nearby (regional) lymph nodes. Cancer can also grow inside the stomach and form an ulcer or mass. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic stomach cancer. A distant metastasis could be in the liver, abdominal lining, or distant lymph nodes. 2 Testing for stomach cancer 12 13 14 15 15 17 Test results General health tests Nutrition assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures H. pylori tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy (including biomarker tests) will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean.
1860	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1861	It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Stomach cancer can also grow inwards and form an ulcer or masses that can cause symptoms. Stomach cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the stomach. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Those with stomach cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small (2 centimeters or less) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer has invaded other layers of the stomach wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near the stomach. Metastatic stomach cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, abdominal lining (peritoneum), and distant lymph nodes. It may also spread to the lungs or bone.
1862	There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there can be more than one sentinel lymph node. Removal of the sentinel lymph nodes during surgery is called a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB or SNB). This procedure is done during surgery such as a mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) or lumpectomy (surgery to remove the tumor) to determine if any cancer cells have traveled to the lymph nodes. The lymph nodes removed are called the sentinel nodes. They may or may not contain any cancer cells. Just because these nodes are removed, it does not mean that they are positive for cancer. To find the sentinel lymph nodes, a radioactive material and other dyes are injected into the area where breast tumor is located. From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes.
1863	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1864	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
1865	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
1866	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1867	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
1868	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
1869	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
1870	If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus.
1871	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
1872	Your doctor will want to know if you have enough red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells to fight infection, and platelets to control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures important chemicals, proteins, and other substances in your blood. Levels that are too high or low could be a sign of a health problem in areas like the kidneys or liver. Who’s on your multidisciplinary care team? Treating bladder cancer takes a team approach. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your cancer treatment, while others will be there for parts of it. Your team should communicate and work together to bring the best knowledge from each specialty. This is called multidisciplinary care. Depending on your diagnosis, your multidisciplinary team may include a dozen or more specialists and care providers: Your primary care doctor handles medical care not related to your cancer. Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs.
1873	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
1874	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1875	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1876	All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA. Mohs surgery can be done in a medical office or surgical suite and should be done by a dermatologic (skin) surgeon who has special training and experience in this procedure. Most patients remain awake during the procedure. After the area is numbed, the visible tumor is first removed using a scalpel. Next, a thin layer of surrounding tissue is removed from under and around the wound. The edges and underside of this tissue are evaluated by the Mohs surgeon using a microscope while you wait. If cancer cells are seen by the surgeon, another thin layer of tissue is removed only from the area of the wound where the cancer was seen. When a removed layer shows no cancer cells at its edges, the procedure is over. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is another option for treating squamous cell skin cancer. A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake.
1877	A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others.
1878	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
1879	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
1880	All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome. Keep in mind that your treatment plan may change. Testing may provide new information. How well the treatment is working may change the plan. Or you may change your mind about treatment. Any of these changes may require a new treatment plan. Stress and symptom control Anxiety and depression are common in people with cancer. At your cancer center, cancer navigators, social workers, and others can help. Help may include support groups, talk therapy, exercising, spending time with loved ones, or medication. You may be unemployed or miss work during treatment. Or, you may have little or no health insurance. Talk to your treatment team about work, insurance, or money concerns. They will include information in the treatment plan to help you manage the costs of care. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app for more information. Supportive care Supportive care aims to relieve the symptoms of cancer or the side effects of cancer treatment.
1881	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1882	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
1883	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
1884	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
1885	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1886	It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis. Basal cells – Found in the lower part of the epidermis, basal cells constantly divide to form new cells that replace the squamous cells on the skin’s surface. Melanocytes – Melanocytes are cells located in the lower part of the epidermis that produce melanin. Melanin is responsible for our hair, skin, and eye color. It also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. This book is only about basal cell skin cancer. For more information on squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes.
1887	Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes. In addition to providing color, melanin also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the chances of getting a disease. For example, smoking cigarettes is a risk factor for developing lung cancer. The major risk factors for squamous cell skin cancer are described next. Sunlight/outdoor tanning Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over the course of many years, especially in people who sunburn easily. People with light skin, hair, and eyes who have been in the sun very often throughout their lives are at the highest risk for squamous cell skin cancer. People who work outdoors are also at higher risk. Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun.
1888	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
1889	Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab). The goal is to look for gene mutations inherited from your biological parents called germline mutations. Some mutations can put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. You can pass these genes on to your children. Also, other family members might carry these mutations. Tell your care team if there is a family history of cancer. BRCA tests Everyone has BRCA genes. Normal BRCA genes help to prevent tumor growth. They help fix damaged cells and help cells grow normally. BRCA mutations put you at risk for more than one type of cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 increase the risk of breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, and melanoma skin cancers. Mutated BRCA genes can also affect how well some treatments work. These tests might be repeated. What is your family cancer health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from biological parent to child. This information is called a family health history.
1890	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
1891	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
1892	For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it.
1893	When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still.
1894	You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery. On the day of your surgery, you will be given medicine to put you into a deep sleep so you won’t feel pain. This is called general anesthesia. Surgery may take 3 or more hours to complete. More or less time may be needed depending on how much tissue is removed. After the surgery, expect to stay in the hospital for a few days or weeks to recover. You may feel some pain and tenderness in your belly and pelvis. It may last for a few days or weeks. You may be able to return to normal activities in a few weeks. The time it takes to fully recover varies from person to person. It also varies depending on the extent of the surgery. Premature menopause If you have not entered menopause, surgery that removes both ovaries will cause it. This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body.
1895	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
1896	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
1897	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
1898	Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nutritionists offer guidance on what foods or diet are most suitable for your particular condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that affect how you feel. Genetic counselors are experts who interpret how your family history may impact your treatment. Some important tests in a CMP are: Liver function test looks at enzymes made by the liver, like alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Kidney function test measures waste products like creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to check if your kidneys are working normally. This test can be very helpful for deciding your treatment. to identify some of these specific tumor cells. Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it.
1899	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1900	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
1901	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
1902	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
1903	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
1904	Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible. Risk assessment After squamous cell skin cancer is confirmed, your doctor will consider several features of the cancer to determine if it is a low-, high-, or very high-risk skin cancer. This is important to know because high- or very high-risk disease is treated differently than low-risk disease. A high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence. A very high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence and of metastasis (spread). The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. The following factors are used to determine your risk level. Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs.
1905	Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread.
1906	You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended. This testing is described in more detail on page Recommended targeted therapies for metastatic cancer that can't be treated with surgery or RAI are listed in Guide Other systemic therapies are available and may be recommended if those listed in Guide 1 aren't available or appropriate. Joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged for everyone with metastatic thyroid cancer. About bone cancer 5 What is bone cancer? 6 What is bone? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Bone cancer includes a group of cancers that start in the bone or cartilage. This is called primary bone cancer and differs from other types of cancers that can spread (metastasize) to the bone. This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers.
1907	You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Because an MRI uses magnets, don’t bring any metal objects (such as jewelry, cell phone, wristwatch, belts with metal buckles) into the imaging room. CT scan If MRI is unavailable or not recommended for you, you might have a computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan instead. A CT scan takes many x-rays of your body from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. A PET scan requires injecting a radioactive substance called a tracer into your bloodstream. It takes about an hour for the tracer to circulate throughout your body. The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine.
1908	Metastatic anal cancer is treated with systemic therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy). Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III anal canal cancer. These stages are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Chemoradiation Chemoradiation is the recommended primary (main) treatment for non-metastatic anal canal cancer. Chemoradiation involves treatment with both chemotherapy and radiation therapy during the same time period. More information on this combined treatment approach is provided next. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy most often uses highenergy x-rays to kill cancer cells. An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer. It is a type of external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, radiation is delivered from outside (external to) the body using a large machine Anal canal cancer (stages I – III) called a linear accelerator. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor. All types of EBRT are conformal, which means that the radiation beams are shaped to the tumor.
1909	How advanced is my bladder cancer? Once bladder cancer is found, it’s important to know how far it has grown or spread. Bladder cancer advances in 3 phases: Non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer has grown on or in the bladder’s inner layer of urothelial cells, but not into the bladder’s muscle layer. Muscle-invasive bladder cancer has grown through the bladder’s inner urothelial layer and into its muscle layer. But it hasn’t grown anywhere else. Metastatic bladder cancer has spread outside the bladder to other areas of the body. Common areas of metastatic bladder cancer include the lymph nodes, bones, lungs, liver, and the inner wall of the abdomen. (Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped glands that transport a fluid called lymph and help fight infection. Lymph nodes are found around the urinary tract and all over the body.) Treatment is different for each of these three phases of bladder cancer. These phases are further divided into stages, which are explained in Chapter Bladder cancer treatment What’s the best treatment for bladder cancer? There’s no single treatment that’s best for everyone. The best treatment for bladder cancer is the treatment that’s best for you.
1910	Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer, or where the cancer started, and if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Metastatic breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer is also called advanced breast cancer.
1911	Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced. Cancer stages and metastasis Some early and locally advanced cancers spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs after diagnosis and then are called metastatic cancer. Stage 4 cancer is metastatic cancer at the time of diagnosis. Information about metastatic NSCLC is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What’s the best treatment? There’s no single treatment for NSCLC that’s best for everyone. The best treatment is the treatment that’s right for you. The following chapters explain expert recommendations that are based on the latest research and current practices at leading cancer centers. Often, multiple treatments are used to get the best results Some people with early or locally advanced NSCLC have surgery to remove cancer from the body. Other types of cancer treatment are used with surgery to improve results. Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. If you can’t have surgery, there are other good options.
1912	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
1913	Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes is called “regional”. Your care team will test suspicious lymph nodes to determine how far the disease has spread. Testing could also include scans of your upper body, stomach, and pelvis to check for any metastatic disease (spread) to those areas. The best way to treat regional CSCC is with surgery to remove the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. Radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy is often given after surgery to kill leftover cancer cells. If surgery is not possible or not recommended, radiation therapy, systemic therapy, or a combination of both may be options. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may harm critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. Although it is uncommon, squamous cell skin cancer can metastasize. Metastatic CSCC that cannot be removed with surgery and/or radiation is treated with systemic therapy. Systemic therapy options for metastatic CSCC include immunotherapy or a systemic therapy given in a clinical trial. If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy.
1914	Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced esophageal cancer has invaded other layers of the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic esophageal cancer. Distant metastases could be in the liver, distant lymph nodes, and lung. 2 Diagnosing esophageal cancer Test results General health tests Nutritional assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results.
1915	See Guide 1 on the next page. If the therapies discussed above aren’t available or appropriate, joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged. Metastatic cancer Thyroid cancer that spreads to areas far from the neck is known as metastatic. Metastatic tumors can form anywhere but are most common in the lungs, liver, muscles, bones, brain, and spinal cord. If the cancer takes up iodine, RAI therapy is recommended to treat metastatic papillary, follicular, or oncocytic thyroid cancers. Local therapies, such as radiation therapy, may also be used to treat areas of cancer directly. If RAI therapy isn’t an option If the cancer doesn't take up iodine, targeted therapy may be an option. But, if the metastatic tumors are growing slowly (or not at all) and aren't causing symptoms, monitoring the cancer may be a better option. Some people live with their thyroid cancer for months or years without needing treatment. You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended.
1916	Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads outside the prostate to other parts of the body is called metastatic prostate cancer. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate gland. It usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. This is also called localized prostate cancer. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has grown outside the prostate and may have spread to other areas in the body such as lymph nodes (bottom left), bones, or organs like the liver or lungs (bottom right). This is also called metastatic prostate cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Early-stage prostate cancer is highly treatable and often curable. The earlier that prostate cancer is diagnosed and treated, the more likely that a patient will live without cancer. Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives.
1917	Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small and is not in any lymph nodes. In locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer, cancer has invaded the second layer (submucosa) of the stomach or beyond. Cancer might be found in nearby (regional) lymph nodes. Cancer can also grow inside the stomach and form an ulcer or mass. Cancer can spread to distant parts of the body through the blood or lymphatic system. This is called metastatic stomach cancer. A distant metastasis could be in the liver, abdominal lining, or distant lymph nodes. 2 Testing for stomach cancer 12 13 14 15 15 17 Test results General health tests Nutrition assessment Blood tests Imaging tests Endoscopy procedures H. pylori tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy (including biomarker tests) will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean.
1918	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
1919	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
1920	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
1921	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
1922	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
1923	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
1924	It is common to have another colonoscopy to thoroughly examine the colon and look for other possible areas of cancer. This is called a diagnostic colonoscopy. Mismatch repair testing Mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI) testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with colon cancer. This feature of some colon cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that help guide your treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome, described next. Family health history Your doctor will ask about the health history of your biological (related by blood) family members. Those with a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer are more likely to have this cancer compared to the average person. Most colon cancers occur for unknown reasons.
1925	Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-1 and PD-L1 testing Programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) are immune proteins. If either protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses either protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a testing method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA, the genetic material in a person’s cells. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope.
1926	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
1927	When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic disease that may remain in the body after colectomy. This information may be helpful in predicting the risk of the cancer returning or other outcomes. But more information is needed, and at this time ctDNA testing is only recommended as part of a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. A radiologist interprets the images and conveys the results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your scans. If you get nervous in tight spaces, let them know. You may be offered a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT Computed tomography (CT) is the main imaging test used to see colon cancer in the body. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine.
1928	This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells. Your surgeon will also take samples from nearby tissues where it looks like cancer hasn’t spread. This is done to check for cancer cells that have spread outside the ovaries or pelvis and can only be seen with a microscope. These are called microscopic metastases. The omentum and sometimes nearby lymph nodes will be removed. The omentum is the fatty layer of tissue that covers organs in the belly (abdomen). Lymph nodes are groups of disease-fighting cells where cancer can also spread. If there is fluid buildup in the abdomen, the fluid will also be sampled. If there isn’t fluid buildup, your doctor may “rinse” the space inside your belly with a special liquid. This is called a peritoneal washing. Samples of the liquid will then be tested for cancer cells. Preparing for surgery Your treatment team will give you instructions on how to prepare for surgery. You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery.
1929	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
1930	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
1931	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
1932	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases.
1933	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases.
1934	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
1935	Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed. These range from pills you take every day to a combination of IV infusions and pills taken for a specific amount of time. You may live for years without needing treatment. If or when someone needs treatment can vary greatly from person to person. You may have a more intense or aggressive treatment plan if you develop Richter transformation, which is described later. This rare condition can lead to a more aggressive cancer called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) or another cancer called Hodgkin lymphoma. Is there a cure for CLL? There is currently no cure for CLL, but you can get effective treatment so your blood cells will be mostly healthy ones and a full life is possible. This is a condition called minimal residual disease. We’ll describe this in a later chapter. While the goal of treatment is not to cure CLL, the goal is to prevent the disease from causing problems and from becoming life-threatening. What is SLL? Small lymphocytic lymphoma, or SLL, is the same cancer as CLL.
1936	To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests. Although you may not receive all of them, let’s look at each of these assessment tools in turn: Risk groups Your care team will look at the clinical characteristics of your cancer, such as your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, biopsy results, and other test results. From this information, your providers can classify your disease into one of five different risk groups, from very low risk to very high risk. Why do you need to know your risk group? Because your risk group is the basis for your prognosis. A prognosis predicts the likely course and outcome of a disease. Your prognosis guides your treatment options. For example, patients with lower risk generally get minimal treatment or no treatment at all. Patients with higher risk usually get more aggressive treatment. Test results and calculations—PSA level, Grade Group, tumor stage, and biopsy results—are put together to determine your risk group. PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer.
1937	Trachelectomy is a fertility-sparing surgery. The uterus and ovaries are left intact, allowing for the possibility of natural pregnancy in the future. In a simple trachelectomy, only the cervix is removed. In a radical trachelectomy, about 2 centimeters (less than a half inch) of vaginal tissue is removed in addition to the cervix. Both types can be performed either through the vagina or the abdomen. Hysterectomy Hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus (including the cervix). The types of hysterectomy that may be used to treat cervical cancer are described below. An extrafascial (simple) hysterectomy removes only the uterus (including the cervix). Extrafascial hysterectomy can be performed through the vagina, through the abdomen, or using a minimally invasive approach. This type is most commonly used for stage IA1 cancer. A modified radical hysterectomy removes the uterus (including the cervix), a portion of the connective tissue that holds the cervix in place, and about a half inch or less of the vagina. Modified radical hysterectomy is performed through the abdomen. A radical hysterectomy removes the uterus (including the cervix), much of the connective tissue that holds the cervix in place, and the top quarter or third of the vagina.
1938	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
1939	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history In general, head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members on both sides of your family about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression.
1940	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
1941	Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that clinical trials are voluntary and you can seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation You don’t need to wait for someone on your care team to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all your treatment options. Ask if a clinical trial is available for your situation. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It’s common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
1942	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
1943	Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition Rectal cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Key points All rectal tumors should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For cancers with this biomarker, testing for an inherited cancer syndrome called Lynch syndrome is recommended. Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS).
1944	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
1945	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1946	Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer hasn't already started to form. For more information on finding polyps early, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum is the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. Most rectal cancers start in polyps called adenomas. These cancers are called adenocarcinomas. 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter discusses testing and other steps needed to create your treatment plan. Mismatch repair testing Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker.
1947	Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Your care team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: IDHGenes are written with italics like this: IDHWhen a gene or protein is found, it is shown with a plus sign like this: . When a gene or protein has not been found, it is written with a negative sign like this: IDH1-. Ewing sarcoma A cell must make a copy of its chromosomes before dividing into two cells. Sometimes, there are mistakes in the copies. One type of mistake is when parts (DNA) of two chromosomes break off and switch with each other. This is called a translocation. It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma.
1948	Chemotherapy can also be given orally. Radiation therapy An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer. At this time, chemotherapy regimens recommended for use with radiation therapy to treat stage I, II, and III anal cancer include: Mitomycin and capecitabine Mitomycin and 5-FU 5-FU and cisplatin While you undergo chemotherapy with one of the above regimens, you will also receive treatment with radiation therapy 5 days per week. These chemotherapy regimens are described in more detail next. Mitomycin and capecitabine is a commonly used regimen. Capecitabine is taken by mouth twice daily, Monday through Friday (on radiation days only), for 5 and a half to 6 weeks. You will be undergoing radiation therapy during the same time period. On the day you begin taking capecitabine, a single intravenous dose of mitomycin will be given. Another dose of mitomycin is usually given at the start of week Mitomycin and 5-FU is another regimen recommended for use with radiation therapy. 5-FU is given by continuous (constant) infusion over several days. You do not need to stay at a treatment center during this time, however.
1949	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
1950	This is called metastatic colon cancer to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There is a subtype of HCC called fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHC). FLHC affects very few people and usually occurs at a younger age. The second most common type of primary liver cancer in adults is called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which is a cancer of the bile ducts. Other primary liver cancers in adults include rare types of sarcoma that start in the blood vessel cells of the liver. Another rare type is made of both hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. This is called a mixed-type tumor. More information on gallbladder and bile duct tumors is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. In the following pages, this patient guideline will focus on the most common type of liver cancer, HCC, and its treatment. How liver cancer spreads Liver cancer can spread in many ways. It can spread directly through the liver. It can also spread to an area far from the primary tumor called a distant metastasis. Liver cancer most often metastasizes to the lung or bone.
1951	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
1952	Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer hasn't already started to form. For more information on finding polyps early, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum is the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. Most rectal cancers start in polyps called adenomas. These cancers are called adenocarcinomas. 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter discusses testing and other steps needed to create your treatment plan. Mismatch repair testing Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker.
1953	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
1954	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
1955	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
1956	The main reason to have a molecular biomarker test is to help assess whether you have lower risk or higher risk prostate cancer. If you have lower risk cancer, you may be able to avoid or delay treatment such as surgery or radiation therapy, which means you’d also avoid or delay any treatment-related complications and side effects. At the same time, a molecular biomarker test can flag those who have higher risk prostate cancer, which may give them a head start on treatment. Molecular biomarker testing is discussed further in Chapter What’s next? After you’ve had all these tests to find out if you have prostate cancer, your care team will put together all your test results to figure out whether your prostate cancer is lower risk or higher risk. Once your level of risk has been identified, your team will assess whether you need treatment and, if so, what your treatment plan will be. Key points An unusually high amount of PSA in the bloodstream may be a sign of prostate cancer. h A digital rectal exam is the simplest way to check the size and texture of your prostate. A biopsy is used to confirm (diagnose) prostate cancer.
1957	Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests.
1958	h A digital rectal exam is the simplest way to check the size and texture of your prostate. A biopsy is used to confirm (diagnose) prostate cancer. It’s a procedure that removes samples of cells or tissue to find cancer. Imaging tests may be used to see if the cancer has spread beyond the prostate. Imaging may not be needed for earlystage prostate cancer. A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes (mutations) in your genes. To find out if you have an inherited risk for cancer, you can talk to your doctor about germline testing or ask to be referred to a genetic counselor. A biopsy sample of your tumor might be tested to look at its molecular components (biomarker testing). 3 Assessing your risk Risk groups Life expectancy Nomograms Molecular biomarker tests What’s next? Key points It’s important to know the risk of your cancer getting worse. Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics.
1959	Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think!
1960	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1961	A genetic counselor can help you decide whether you would like to undergo germline testing and also help you interpret the results of these tests. Inherited gene testing is recommended if you have prostate cancer and any of the following: Family members or relatives who have or had prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, intestinal cancer, and certain other cancers Family history of mutations in certain genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and others Very-high-risk, high-risk, regional (cancer in a lymph node), or metastatic prostate cancer regardless of family history h Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry Talk to your medical providers and/or a genetic counselor about your family history of cancer. Tumor testing Tumor testing (also called somatic testing, molecular tumor testing, or tumor profiling) requires a tissue sample from the tumor itself or from a metastasis in a lymph node, bone, liver, lung, or other affected area. Or it may come a sample of your blood, which contains the tumor’s DNA. In this type of testing, the sample is analyzed to look at its molecular components. Tumors often release molecules that can be used as clues for finding and learning about the cancer.
1962	Get other recommended health care such as blood pressure screening, hepatitis C screening, and immunizations (such as the flu shot). Leading a healthy lifestyle includes maintaining a healthy body weight. Try to exercise at a moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week. All patients should have a discussion with their doctor before starting a new exercise regimen. Eat a healthy diet with lots of plantbased foods. Talk to your doctor about taking aspirin every day to prevent future cancers. Radiation treatment to the pelvis can weaken bones in the pelvis, putting you at increased risk of fractures. Your doctor may want to start monitoring the density of your bones. Alcohol can increase the risk of certain cancers. Drink little to no alcohol. If you smoke, quit! Your doctor will be able to provide (or refer you for) counseling on how to stop smoking. Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains).
1963	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
1964	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
1965	Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. Usually in ALL, there are too many abnormal white blood cells (lymphoblasts). How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very immature to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. After a blood stem cell develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into your bloodstream as needed. The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
1966	Primary CNS lymphoma is frequently linked to HIV, the immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Carrying the Epstein-Barr virus, which is the virus that causes mononucleosis (“mono”) and other illnesses. Epstein-Barr is one of the most common viruses in humans. Most people are infected with it. After you’re infected, the virus remains dormant (inactive or “sleeping”) in your body for life. Having an autoimmune disease, such as lupus, in which the immune system overreacts and attacks healthy tissues and organs. Having an organ transplant, which requires medications that suppress the immune system. This leads to a higher risk of infections. Being an older adult. Although primary CNS lymphoma can occur at any age, the majority of people diagnosed with it are in their 60s or 70s. How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Primary CNS lymphoma is often found when a person develops symptoms. A symptom is a feeling or problem that may be a sign of disease. Symptoms usually develop over several weeks. Primary CNS lymphoma can cause a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain.
1967	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
1968	Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
1969	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
1970	The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth. Information for treatment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Squamous Cell Skin Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location and cancer stage. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book.
1971	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1972	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
1973	You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
1974	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
1975	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
1976	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
1977	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
1978	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
1979	The adrenal cortex makes 3 main hormones: cortisol, aldosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). These hormones control metabolism, blood pressure, and body features (such as hair growth and body shape). Adrenal medulla – This is the inner part of the adrenal gland. The medulla makes 3 hormones: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. These hormones control the body’s response to stress. This includes the “fight or flight” surge of adrenaline. Adrenal glands Adrenal glands are small, triangle-shaped glands found on the top of the kidneys. These glands make hormones that help to regulate your immune system, response to stress, metabolism, and other functions. AnatomyoftheAdrenalGland Adrenal tumors Adrenal tumors can occur in one or both adrenal glands. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign (not cancer). Adrenal tumors often do not cause symptoms and are found through an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan performed for another reason. Adrenal tumors are categorized in the following ways: Benign (not cancer) adrenal tumors do not metastasize (spread) to other parts of the body. This type of tumor is often found by chance through imaging tests done for an unrelated issue. Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading.
1980	When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core. A core sample is only 1 to 2 Biopsy of the prostate A biopsy removes a sample of tissue that is tested for cancer. This is a transperineal biopsy, in which a needle is inserted through the perineum and into the prostate. An ultrasound probe, which goes into the rectum, helps the doctor guide the needle into the prostate. MRI scans of your prostate may be combined with the ultrasound image to provide a highly accurate picture of the cancer. millimiters wide and about 12 to 20 millimeters long—about the width of a toothpick and the length of a raisin. The urologist will typically take 12 or more core samples from different parts of the prostate. Checking different areas provides a more complete evaluation of cancer throughout the gland. After the biopsy samples are removed, they’ll be sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer.
1981	This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger. The device uses highenergy sound waves to create a view of the prostate from inside the body. These images allow the surgeon to remove a small sample of the prostate without having to open up your abdomen. PET/CT scan of prostate cancer This image combines PET and CT scans to show a cross-section of a patient’s pelvis. The greenish circle identifies cancer in the prostate, while the intense red dot indicates cancer that has spread to a lymph node in the pelvis. At some centers, your saved MRI images can be combined with real-time ultrasound to provide a more detailed view for a more precise biopsy. This is called MRI-TRUS fusion. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of cells, fluid, or tissue is removed from your body and tested for cancer. It’s the main way to confirm whether you have cancer. A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk.
1982	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
1983	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
1984	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
1985	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
1986	It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the fusion of the EWS gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 with various members of the ETS gene family (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and FEV), with FLI1 being the most common. Almost everyone with Ewing sarcoma will have one of the possible gene fusions. This is not inherited from your birth parents but results from an error of cell division while your tissues were growing. This is called a somatic mutation or somatic change. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors.
1987	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
1988	Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches.
1989	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
1990	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
1991	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
1992	The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth. Information for treatment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Squamous Cell Skin Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location and cancer stage. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book.
1993	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
1994	The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood. Lung cancer Almost all lung cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Lung carcinomas start in the cells that line the airways of the lungs. The airways of the lungs include the bronchus, bronchioles, and alveoli. There are different types of lung carcinoma. The main types are non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Other types of cancer can spread to the lungs, such as breast cancer. Breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still called breast cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a group of cancers that are the most common type of lung cancer. NSCLC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas.
1995	The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. ALL is thought to arise from stem cells that make an increased amount of lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into a type of white blood cell called lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for ALL provides an overview of tests your child might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy.
1996	It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know who to contact with questions or concerns. Ask who will coordinate your care and what efforts can be made to schedule appointments together. Your multidisciplinary care team should clearly discuss your care goals with you. Removing or reducing the size of your lymphoma is one goal of your team. But you and your team’s other goals may include improving your overall well-being, maintaining your ability to do dayto-day activities, reducing pain, getting good nutrition, and lowering stress and anxiety. Your multidisciplinary team will meet to discuss your treatment and which options are best for you. The next chapter explains the phases of treatment and what your individual treatment plan may be. Quality of life Quality of life refers to a person’s overall enjoyment of life, including their sense of well-being and ability to participate in their usual activities. Your quality of life should be the main priority that guides your treatment and care.
1997	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
1998	Use the questions in the back of the book to discuss and decide with your care team which care options are right for you. Choose a multidisciplinary team. It takes a team of experts to treat pancreatic cancer. Read this book to learn which care providers are part of the team. You choose your team by deciding where to get care. Getting a second opinion on treatment may help you decide which treatment to receive. Be an active team member. When discussing treatment, share your goals with your team. Ask questions when you don’t understand. Supportive care is part of cancer care, so tell your team about symptoms and other challenges you have. Key parts of supportive care are explained in this book. 2 Tests for pancreatic cancer Multidisciplinary consult Imaging Endoscopic tests Biopsy Blood tests Genetic tests for inherited mutations Biomarker tests for profiling Key points A series of tests is needed to identify pancreatic cancer and make a treatment plan. Imaging is key to staging the cancer and deciding if surgery is a treatment option. Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment.
1999	The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors. Radiation exposure Anyone who has had radiation treatment to the head or neck in the past (to treat a childhood cancer, for example) is at increased risk of thyroid cancer. Contact with large amounts of radiation in the environment as a result of a catastrophic event also increases the risk of developing a thyroid cancer. Family history Most thyroid cancers are sporadic, meaning there is no clear cause or risk factor. Only a small number are hereditary, or the result of inherited gene mutations (changes). A personal or family history of thyroid cancer or a related syndrome may increase the risk of thyroid cancer. Syndromes related to thyroid cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Carney complex, Cowden syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Cowden syndrome is also known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). This inherited syndrome can cause follicular thyroid cancer, and other cancers and health problems. Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck.
2000	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
2001	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
2002	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
2003	The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs.
2004	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
2005	APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer. This type of surgery is also used for some rectal cancers. In addition to the anus, APR typically involves removing the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and the fatty tissue surrounding the rectum. Lymph nodes in the groin will also be removed during surgery if any are known to have cancer. This is known as a groin dissection. Radiation treatment for anal cancer weakens and damages the perineum, which can interfere with healing after APR. In some cases, closing the wound requires taking tissue from another area of the body. This is known as muscle flap reconstruction. It can improve healing of the perineum and reduce complications after surgery. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominis, along with skin, fat, and blood vessels, is often used for reconstruction. If APR is planned, ask your doctor about muscle flap reconstruction. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment.
2006	For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended. A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery. If the results are good, your next colonoscopy will take place in 3 years. After that, a colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years. Other local excision results Sometimes more treatment is needed after local excision. Reasons you may need more treatment include: Testing of the removed tissues finds high risk features The tumor is larger than expected and has invaded the muscle layer (a T2 tumor) In either case, the preferred next treatment is transabdominal surgery. See the next page for more information on this method. A second option is chemotherapy combined with radiation. Doctors call this chemoradiation. This treatment approach is normally used for locally advanced cancers. See page 23 for more information. If chemoradiation works well, you might have chemotherapy next to kill any lingering cancer cells. Or, you and your doctor may agree to watch and wait. If there are signs of cancer after chemoradiation, transabdominal resection is recommended. Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors.
2007	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
2008	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
2009	The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs.
2010	One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy. This is typically only needed for a short time. Another possibility is that a colostomy may be done first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. Lastly, in rare cases, a mesh metal tube called a stent may be placed first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. The stent keeps the colon open, allowing gas and stool to pass. Staging The cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body. Having a general idea of the structure of the colon wall is helpful for understanding how colon cancer is staged. The colon wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with food. This layer is called the mucosa. The next layer is the submucosa. It is made of connective tissue and contains mucus glands, blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia).
2011	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
2012	In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. The sample is sent to a lab to be tested for cancer cells. Your tumor type If molecular testing was performed on your biopsy sample, the pathology report should reveal your tumor type. It’s important to identify the exact type of tumor you have to predict the course of your disease and plan your treatment. There are 3 ways to classify a glioma: Histology – The first way to classify the tumor is by looking at it under a microscope. This is called histology. For instance, a glioma with cells that look like astrocytes is likely to be an astrocytoma. Grade – Another way to classify a tumor is by grade, which is a rating of how abnormal its cells are. The more abnormal its cells, the faster and farther the tumor is likely to grow. Biomarkers – A glioma is also identified by its biomarkers. A biomarker is a molecular characteristic such as a genetic mutation. Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene.
2013	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
2014	Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches.
2015	Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you keep track your appointments and communicate with your care team. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take.
2016	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2017	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
2018	It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse. Maintenance therapy is an option for stage 2, 3, and 4 cancers that respond well to surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. PARP inhibitors (PARPi) are a newer option for maintenance therapy after initial treatment. These oral targeted therapies work best in homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)- positive cancers, including those caused by a BRCA mutation. PARP inhibitors currently used for maintenance therapy after initial treatment of ovarian cancer include: Olaparib (Lynparza) Niraparib (Zejula) Rucaparib (Rubraca) The most common side effects of PARP inhibitors are similar to those caused by chemotherapy. They include fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and low blood cell counts. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Myelodysplastic syndrome is a cancer in which the bone marrow does not make enough healthy blood cells. There are abnormal cells in the blood and/or bone marrow. Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML.
2019	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
2020	You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! 2 Testing for AML Overview General health tests Blood tests Fertility (all genders) Performance status Bone marrow tests Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Lumbar puncture Key points Questions to ask Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Overview Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat AML. A diagnosis of AML is based on the presence of myeloid blasts in the bone marrow or blood. The number of blasts required to be diagnosed with AML can vary. In general, the number of blasts must be 20 percent or more of all cells found in the bone marrow. This means that at least 1 out of every 5 bone marrow cells are blasts.
2021	Keep copies of your pathology reports. The pathology report might include a lot of abbreviations such as pN0(mol+), ypT2, or cNAsk your care team to explain what they mean. 4 Treating IBC Care team 39 Immunotherapy Treatment overview 40 Endocrine therapy Mastectomy 42 Bone-strengthening therapy Radiation therapy 43 Clinical trials Chemotherapy 45 Supportive care Myeloid growth factors 46 Side effects HER2-targeted therapy 49 Key points Inhibitors This chapter provides an overview of treatment options and what to expect. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Care team Treating breast cancer takes a team approach. Treatment decisions should involve a multidisciplinary team (MDT). An MDT is a team of health care and psychosocial care professionals from different professional backgrounds who have knowledge (expertise) and experience in your type of cancer. This team is united in the planning and implementing of your treatment. Ask who will coordinate your care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout cancer treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
2022	The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. Often, in CML the very immature or most immature cells (myeloblasts or lymphoblasts) are referred to simply as blasts. CML is thought to arise from blood stem cells that make an increased amount of myeloid progenitor cells. However, an advanced form of CML, called blast phase CML (BP-CML), can cause an increased amount of lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The type of blast phase cell will affect treatment in BP-CML. What causes CML? The cause of CML can be traced to a single, specific abnormal gene called BCR::ABLThis fused gene occurs when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and switch places. This creates a new, abnormal chromosome 22 that contains a small part of chromosome This new chromosome is referred to as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) and is the hallmark of CML. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells.
2023	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
2024	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
2025	Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer.
2026	Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body. The images can show the size, location, and other features of cancer. Imaging can reveal where the cancer started and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in interpreting imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor or care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor or other health care provider will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you have. Is blue light cystoscopy better? Cystoscopy commonly uses a white light to see inside the bladder. Some newer cystoscopes now use a blue light. When combined with a special dye injected into the bladder, blue light cystoscopy can identify tumors a little more distinctly than white light. Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye.
2027	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2028	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
2029	Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures. It is done while you are awake with a topical spray to make you more comfortable. Laryngoscopy and nasolaryngoscopy Laryngoscopy is an exam of the back of your throat, including your voice box (larynx) or behind your voice box (hypopharynx). It uses a laryngoscope, which is a thin, long tube fitted with a fiberoptic light. Your voice box contains your vocal cords and allows you to speak. A laryngoscope is used to look for tumors in the throat and voice box (larynx) and hypopharynx. Laryngoscopy may be done in different ways: Indirect laryngoscopy uses a small mirror held at the back of your throat. The doctor shines a light on the mirror to view the throat area. Medicine to numb the back of your throat may be used. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy (nasolaryngoscopy) uses a small flexible scope passed through your nose and into your throat. Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute.
2030	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2031	It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Epstein-Barr virus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common virus that causes infectious mononucleosis. It remains dormant or inactive in most people. Cancer caused by EBV is called EBV-related cancer. Most nasopharyngeal cancers are EBV-related. A sample of your tumor and/or blood will be tested for EBV DNA before and after treatment. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
2032	More information on esophageal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a type of cancer that affects the nasopharynx. The nasopharynx connects the back of the nose (nasal cavity) to the back of the mouth (pharynx). Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of nasopharyngeal cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the nasopharynx. SCC is the focus of this book. 2 Testing for NPC Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from medical history, physical examination, imaging studies, and biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results.
2033	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
2034	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2035	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
2036	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
2037	After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors.
2038	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
2039	In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection.
2040	Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It’s common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You’ll be informed if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There’s no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments and the costs of routine Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact patient care during the trial. Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance.
2041	This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder. Imaging tests can show whether cancer has spread to tissues, organs, and lymph nodes near the bladder, or to distant parts of the body. A urogram uses contrast and CT or MRI to see the lining of your urinary tract and to find out the extent of your bladder cancer. A urogram uses contrast and CT or MRI to see how well your urinary tract is working and to find out the extent of bladder cancer. People who smoke are much more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it’s very important to quit. Smoking or vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke.
2042	They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor. Cancer in the lymph nodes is called nodal disease and is rare in bone cancer. NX – Cancer in nearby lymph nodes cannot be measured. N0 – There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes. N1 – Cancer is found in the regional lymph nodes. M Metastasis Bone cancer can spread through blood or the lymphatic system. Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is defined as MWhen cancer is not metastatic it is labeled as MBone cancer can spread to the lung, other bones, or other parts of the body. Bone cancer that has metastasized to the lung is still called bone cancer. M0 – No distant metastasis M1 – Distant metastasis is found • M1a – Metastasis is in the lung • M1b – Metastasis is in the bone or other distant sites The pelvis The pelvis is a basin-shaped structure that supports the spinal column and protects the abdominal organs. G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade.
2043	Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures. It is done while you are awake with a topical spray to make you more comfortable. Laryngoscopy and nasolaryngoscopy Laryngoscopy is an exam of the back of your throat, including your voice box (larynx) or behind your voice box (hypopharynx). It uses a laryngoscope, which is a thin, long tube fitted with a fiberoptic light. Your voice box contains your vocal cords and allows you to speak. A laryngoscope is used to look for tumors in the throat and voice box (larynx) and hypopharynx. Laryngoscopy may be done in different ways: Indirect laryngoscopy uses a small mirror held at the back of your throat. The doctor shines a light on the mirror to view the throat area. Medicine to numb the back of your throat may be used. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy (nasolaryngoscopy) uses a small flexible scope passed through your nose and into your throat. Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute.
2044	In some cases, PET may be performed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (described next) instead of CT. MRI An MRI makes pictures of areas inside the body without using radiation. An MRI can show the tissues of the uterus, cervix, and vagina in detail. Magnetic resonance imaging MRI uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body. It is especially good at making clear pictures of areas of soft tissue. Unlike a CT scan or -ray, MRI does not use radiation. You may have an MRI of your pelvis. An MRI can show the tissues of the uterus, cervix, and vagina closely. An MRI may show whether the cancer has spread to tissues next to the cervix, such as the parametrium, vagina, bladder, or rectum. For those with small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC), MRI of the brain is also recommended as part of initial testing. Getting an MRI scan is similar to getting a CT scan. You will lie face-up on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The scan may cause your body to feel a bit warm.
2045	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
2046	A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas. Tumors larger than 4 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a walnut) and high-risk types of papillary cancer should also be treated with total thyroidectomy. Lymph nodes near the thyroid that are known to have cancer are also removed during surgery. There are other reasons your doctor may recommend a total thyroidectomy. Factors such as whether the neck area was ever treated with radiation therapy will be considered. If the cancer is small and noninvasive, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. Treatment with lobectomy is preferred if the following criteria are met: You’ve never had radiation therapy The cancer hasn’t spread at all beyond the thyroid. The tumor is 1 to 4 cm in size. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic exam of the removed tissues.
2047	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
2048	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
2049	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
2050	If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer. Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. it goes up, further testing should be done to check for cancer recurrence. Long-term monitoring If follow-up test results are normal, it is considered no evidence of disease (NED). In those with NED, longer-term surveillance includes physical exams, blood tests (TSH, Tg, and Tg ab), and periodic neck ultrasound. If there is reason to suspect the cancer has returned, you may have additional lab work, additional neck ultrasounds, TSH-stimulated testing (testing while thyroid hormone is stopped), or imaging procedures such as CT or MRI. After lobectomy Short-term follow-up after lobectomy involves a physical exam and TSH blood test. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. Unlike after total thyroidectomy, Tg testing isn’t helpful after lobectomy. If there is no evidence of disease, longer-term surveillance includes physical exams, TSH blood tests, and neck ultrasound. Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors.
2051	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
2052	This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy. It is needed lifelong in all people after total thyroidectomy. After a lobectomy, about 1 in 3 people need thyroid hormone therapy. Levothyroxine (eg, Levoxyl; Synthroid) is the most commonly used thyroid hormone replacement therapy. The goal for most people is to keep the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the low normal range. For higher risk thyroid cancers, or if there are signs of recurrence, the TSH level is kept lower than the normal range (suppressed). This helps prevent thyroid cancer cells from growing or returning. Suppression is an important part of cancer therapy for most differentiated thyroid cancers. Levothyroxine is taken as a pill once a day. It must be taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 mintutes prior to eating a meal. If not, it won't be adequately absorbed into the blood. Finding the right dose can take some trial and error. If the dose isn't optimal, common side effects include: Anxiety Trouble sleeping Racing heart (with or without an abnormal heartbeat) Sweating Blood tests are used to check the TSH level on a regular basis during thyroid replacement therapy.
2053	It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen. You’ll need to stay in the hospital for at least several days. It may take 2 to 3 months or longer for you to recover. Common side effects and complications of a radical cystectomy include constipation, diarrhea, bleeding, bowel problems, infections, and changes in sexual function. Talk to your Cystectomy Cystectomy is surgery to remove the bladder. A radical cystectomy removes the entire bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs. It’s the most common surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A partial cystectomy removes part of the bladder. It’s rarely used for bladder cancer. urologist and treatment team about the risks, benefits, and side effects of a radical cystectomy. Because a radical cystectomy removes your entire bladder, you’ll need a new way for urine to exit your body. So another procedure, called a urinary diversion, is also done at the same time. To find out about the 3 types of urinary diversion, see the next page. Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer.
2054	Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). An excisional biopsy is when a whole lymph node is removed by a surgeon, while an incisional biopsy removes only part of a lymph node. There are many lymph nodes throughout your body, so if you have a lymph node removed, you won’t lose your ability to fight infections and disease. Needle biopsies take a small sample of a lymph node using a needle. They can be done when other biopsies are not safe to perform. A lab test will be used to find the immunophenotype of the biopsied cells. A bone marrow biopsy removes a core sample of marrow. A bone marrow aspiration removes liquid and cells from the marrow. These procedures are usually done at the same time. They’re performed on the back of the hip bone. You may receive an injected pain blocker or light sedative to help you relax. Tests of bone marrow aren’t usually needed for diagnosis, so you might not get one. How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers.
2055	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. Confirmed CSCC Once a diagnosis of CSCC is made, your doctor will follow up with: A complete head-to-toe skin exam to look for other lesions An exam of the lymph nodes Cancer cells can travel through blood and a fluid called lymph to form tumors in other parts of the body. Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures that are part of the body's immune system. Lymph nodes filter substances that travel through the lymphatic fluid. They contain lymphocytes (white blood cells) that help the body fight infection and disease. If your lymph nodes feel larger than they should be, cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes (this is also called “nodal disease”). To find out, your doctor will use a needle biopsy to take a sample from the lymph node for testing. Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is referred to as “local” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC.
2056	This means that urine follows the same path out of the body it normally would if you still had your bladder. Because urine leaves the body in the usual way, a stoma and an ostomy bag aren’t needed. A neobladder doesn’t work exactly the same way as a real bladder. You’ll probably need to empty it more often at first, maybe every 1 to 3 hours. Also, urine might come out when you don’t want or expect it to, like during sleep. This is called urinary incontinence. With time and training, you’ll be able to better control the flow of urine from your neobladder. Even so, a neobladder may be difficult to empty completely. Some people have a catheter inserted through their urethra to help empty the neobladder. Continent cutaneous pouch (Indiana pouch) This urinary diversion uses a portion of the large intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. (It’s also called an Indiana pouch because it was developed by surgeons at Indiana University.) A section of the small intestine is used to connect the pouch to a stoma in the wall of the abdomen.
2057	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
2058	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
2059	Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells.
2060	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
2061	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
2062	Other symptoms also sometimes occur. Gliomas can cause vision problems such as blurred vision, double vision, or loss of peripheral (side) vision. Sensory disturbances include numbness, tingling, or burning sensations often on one side of the body. And high-grade gliomas are linked to blood clots in the legs and the lungs, which can cause leg swelling, chest pain, and shortness of breath. If you have any of these symptoms, your provider may want to take a closer look. This is where imaging comes in, which is discussed on the next page. Areas of the brain and their functions PARIETAL LOBE intelligence language reading sensation sensory perception OCCIPITAL LOBE vision color perception Neurological exam A neurological exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, thinking, balance, coordination, reflexes, strength, hearing, and senses of touch and smell. You may also have an eye exam to check the health of the nerves in the back of your eyes. Performance status Your team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like working, taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status.
2063	Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord. Primary CNS lymphoma occurs more often in the brain than in the spinal cord, but it can also involve the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Lymphoma – Lymphoma is cancer that forms from lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. So, a lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth of lymphocytes. Now let’s put it all together: Primary CNS lymphoma is a cancer that begins when lymphocytes in the brain and spinal cord grow out of control. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in lymphocytes in the immune system. The immune system is your body’s natural defense against infection and disease. Having an impaired immune system may increase the risk of developing this cancer. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas within the nervous system. For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body.
2064	Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy.
2065	When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic disease that may remain in the body after colectomy. This information may be helpful in predicting the risk of the cancer returning or other outcomes. But more information is needed, and at this time ctDNA testing is only recommended as part of a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. A radiologist interprets the images and conveys the results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your scans. If you get nervous in tight spaces, let them know. You may be offered a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT Computed tomography (CT) is the main imaging test used to see colon cancer in the body. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine.
2066	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
2067	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2068	Functional adrenal tumors are usually benign, although some are capable of becoming cancerous and spreading. Benign functional tumors can still produce hormones and may be found during tests for hormone-related symptoms. Malignant adrenal tumors are cancerous tumors. They are rare, with about 300 to 500 people being diagnosed each year. Certain genetic conditions may increase the risk for these tumors. treatment. An adenoma that produces too much of the hormone aldosterone is called an aldosteronoma. Whereas, an adenoma that produces too much of the hormone cortisol (stress hormone) causes a condition called Cushing syndrome. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) – Although it is the most common type of adrenal gland cancer, it is very rare and affects approximately 1 to 2 people out of every 1 million. Adrenocortical carcinoma begins in the adrenal cortex. It can be a functioning or nonfunctioning tumor. If the tumor is functioning, it may produce more than 1 hormone. Neuroblastoma – This rare type of adrenal tumor is cancerous. It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones.
2069	A history of smoking Having given birth more than once (called “high parity” or multiparity) Oral contraceptive (birth control) use Being sexually active at an early age A high number of sexual partners A history of sexually transmitted infection Certain autoimmune diseases A weakened immune system due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, for example Types of cervical cancer Most cervical cancers start in the ectocervix. The ectocervix is lined with squamous cells. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called a squamous cell carcinoma. About 2 out of 10 cervical cancers form in the endocervical canal. The endocervix is lined with cells that make mucus. These cells are referred to as glandular, gland-like, secretory, or columnar cells. Cancers that form in glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. Less commonly, the cancer may contain both squamous and adenocarcinoma cells. These cancers are referred to as adenosquamous carcinomas. They are sometimes called “mixed” tumors. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
2070	Adenocarcinoma starts in the mucusmaking cells that line the alveoli (small air sacs). This is the most common subtype. About 4 out of 10 lung cancers are adenocarcinomas. This is the most common type of lung cancer seen in those who don’t smoke or who don’t have a history of smoking. More information on NSCLC and SCLC is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma starts in the flat cells that line the inside of the airways (bronchi) in the lungs. About 3 out of 10 lung cancers are squamous cell carcinomas. Large cell (undifferentiated) carcinoma starts in large cells that can grow anywhere in the lungs. This accounts for 5 out of 10 NSCLCs. Small cell lung cancer Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a fast-dividing cancer of the neuroendocrine cells. Under a microscope, the cancer cells look small and oval- or oat-shaped. It is the second most common type of lung cancer. About 1 out of every 10 lung cancers are SCLC. Early detection The goal of lung cancer screening is to find lung cancer at an early stage, even before there are any symptoms.
2071	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
2072	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2073	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
2074	Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health. These include a neurological exam and an evaluation of your level of activity. After these, you’ll have imaging scans and one or more biopsies. Neurological exam This exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, balance, coordination, reflexes, hearing, and other senses. Your doctor may also perform an eye exam to look at the health of the nerves in the back of your eye. Performance status Your care team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status. The more activities you can do, the better your performance status. Your care team uses this evaluation to get a sense of the level of treatment you may be able to handle and whether you may be eligible for a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer.
2075	You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. 2 Tests for primary CNS Tests for diagnosis Tests after diagnosis What’s next? Key points Different tests are needed to identify primary CNS lymphoma and to make a treatment plan. The key to confirming the diagnosis is removing a small sample of the tumor tissue and testing it. Many diseases have signs and symptoms similar to primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, including neurological illnesses and other types of brain cancer. So it’s important to have tests to confirm your diagnosis. If you're given a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll have more tests to find out how far the cancer extends within the central nervous system or if it has spread to another area of the body. Tests are also used to help plan your treatment. Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health.
2076	Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. Sometimes, the sample is taken straight to the neuropathologist while you’re still in the operating room. The neuropathologist will perform an analysis right away and send the results back to the neurosurgeon. The results will say whether the tumor is malignant (cancerous) or benign (not cancerous). The results may also include the preliminary diagnosis, including the type and grade of the glioma. Knowing the preliminary diagnosis during your surgery helps the neurosurgeon to decide how much of the tumor to remove. The neuropathologist will also do molecular (genetic) testing, which indicates the type and growth rate of your glioma and other specific features. All this information will help your treatment team figure out the best treatment plan for you. If your hospital or medical center doesn’t have a neuropathologist, you can ask to have your biopsy sent to one. Stereotactic biopsy A stereotactic biopsy is needed to diagnose a glioma tumor. In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor.
2077	This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed. In stage 1, the tumor has grown into the second or third (muscle) layer of the rectal wall. No further treatment is needed. In stage 2, the tumor has grown through the rectal wall and possibly into nearby tissues or organs. In stage 3, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. More treatment is almost always needed for stage 2 and 3 cancers. Next treatments may include chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or both. More information on chemotherapy is provided next. See page 24 for information on chemoradiation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Chemotherapy regimens used to treat rectal cancer are listed in Guide Any regimen that has “OX” in the name includes oxaliplatin. Oxaliplatin can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy) to your fingers and toes. Symptoms include numbness, cramping, tingling, or pain in these areas. Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
2078	It’s the recommended procedure when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. It aims to remove only enough of the tumor to make a diagnosis. A stereotactic biopsy is done by a neurosurgeon in an operating room. First, you’ll be fitted with a frame or several tiny markers around your head to aid the surgery. Next, you’ll be given anesthesia to go to sleep. A small area of your hair will be shaved down to the scalp. The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures and you’ll be able to go home. What an MRI shows An MRI scan highlights primary CNS lymphoma in the brain. People with primary CNS lymphoma may have one or multiple tumors appear on their scan. Image: Stephanie E. Weiss, MD, FASTRO The tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis.
2079	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
2080	It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing. Intravesical chemotherapy may also be an option if BCG is unavailable, or if you were given BCG therapy but it wasn’t effective. In these cases, it’s given on the same schedule as BCG therapy: once a week for 6 weeks, usually beginning 3 to 4 weeks after TURBT. Maintenance intravesical chemotherapy, if given, is usually on a monthly basis for 1 to 2 years. Because intravesical chemotherapy only goes into the bladder, not the entire body, it doesn’t usually cause the harsh side effects that chemotherapy is known for. However, it may cause the same type of side effects as intravesical BCG therapy. BCG shortage Even though BCG has been used for decades to treat bladder cancer, it’s been in short supply in the United States and worldwide for several years. As a result, many people with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer haven’t been able to receive this treatment or have received a reduced dose. Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it.
2081	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
2082	SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book. NCCN has a two-part book series on NSCLC, found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are the causes and risk factors? Smoking cigarettes is the main cause of SCLC. Almost everyone with SCLC smokes or has smoked. Many people with SCLC have regularly smoked more than a pack a day. Exposure to second-hand smoke also increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from combustible tobacco products. Although rare in Western countries, there are occasions where people with no smoking history develop this disease. There are other unknown causes of SCLC. Researchers are still learning why some people who smoke never get lung cancer and others who have never smoked do. A person’s chances of getting SCLC are higher in the following situations: Over 70 years of age Prior radiation therapy to the chest Exposure to cancer-causing chemicals (also known as carcinogens), such as radon and asbestos If you don’t smoke, don’t start. If you do smoke, quit. New lung tumors are less likely to develop after quitting smoking.
2083	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2084	The diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis: The likely course and outcome of a disease. The prognosis predicts how your disease will turn out. Can gliomas be cured? Most gliomas are not curable, but they are usually treatable. Treatment can slow down the tumor’s growth for a period of time, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for a glioma are surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. These are often combined with one another for more complete treatment. Another option to consider is participating in a clinical trial for a potential new treatment. Treatment may be able to stop the glioma from growing and keep it stabilized for a time. This may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, gliomas usually grow back eventually. So periodic follow-up visits and additional rounds of treatment are recommended. It’s true that gliomas are eventually fatal for most patients. Many people diagnosed with a glioma have a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. New therapies designed to treat specific types of gliomas are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease.
2085	Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences. Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines tumors on the bladder wall and removes them. Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It involves removing the bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs in the pelvis. A urinary diversion is a surgical procedure included with a radical cystectomy. Its purpose is to provide a new way for urine to leave the body. Intravesical therapy is the use of cancer medicine placed directly into the bladder through a catheter. The medicine is slowly put into the bladder using a process called instillation. Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). Chemotherapy affects cancer cells (and other cells) throughout the whole body. All treatments for bladder cancer can cause side effects. Ask your care team about ways to deal with the side effects of treatment. What’s your stage? If you’ve reached this page, then you’ve probably been told the stage of your bladder cancer.
2086	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
2087	A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia. However, these may not be the genetic changes you were born with. Therefore, a skin punch biopsy is used. In this procedure, a small piece of skin and connective tissue is removed to get DNA that hasn’t been altered by AML. This will be used to see if you inherited genes that increase your risk of leukemia. Leukemia predisposition syndrome can affect how your body responds to treatment. Blood and saliva can be used when AML cells disappear (in remission). Biological family members who are possible hematopoietic cell donors might be tested for leukemia predisposition syndrome. Testing of cells not affected by your leukemia (like skin) can help tell if you have a leukemia predisposition syndrome. AML mutation testing Mutation testing using methods such as karyotype (or cytogenetics), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), next-generation sequencing (NGS), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) look for changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells (genes and chromosomes).
2088	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
2089	If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most smokers. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your doctor about counseling and medicines that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco High-risk or very high-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for high-risk or very high-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA (preferred for very high-risk CSCC) Standard surgical excision If you are not a candidate for surgery, see If surgery is not an option on the next page. Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes.
2090	If you do smoke, quit. New lung tumors are less likely to develop after quitting smoking. Nicotine addiction is one of the hardest addictions to stop. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. There is help. Ask your health care providers about counseling and medicines to help you quit. What are the symptoms of SCLC? SCLC can cause many types of symptoms. The symptoms depend on where the lung tumor has grown to or spread. SCLC can prevent the lungs from getting the air they need. Some people also have symptoms from paraneoplastic syndromes, which are caused by an abnormal body response to lung cancer. Some symptoms caused by SCLC are listed in Guide SCLC is often found when it’s causing symptoms or routine blood tests are abnormal. Less often, it’s found in x-rays or CT scans before symptoms start. Unlike other lung cancers, it’s difficult to detect SCLC early because it grows more quickly. Airways of the lungs Air moves through your body in a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through the windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi.
2091	If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most smokers. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your doctor about counseling and medicines that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco High-risk or very high-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for high-risk or very high-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA (preferred for very high-risk CSCC) Standard surgical excision If you are not a candidate for surgery, see If surgery is not an option on the next page. Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes.
2092	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
2093	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
2094	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
2095	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
2096	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
2097	Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size. Diagnostic mammograms are also used to take a closer look at an abnormal area found in a screening mammogram. A radiologist will evaluate the diagnostic mammogram while you wait so if additional testing is needed, it can be done right away. Both types of mammograms use low dose x-rays to examine the breast. They may use either the standard 2-dimensional (2D) digital mammogram or 3-dimensional (3D) mammogram known as tomosynthesis. 2 Testing for DCIS Test results General health tests Physical exam Imaging tests Biopsy Estrogen receptor status Genetic cancer risk testing Cancer stages Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop.
2098	Small tubes called ducts connect the lobules to the nipple. The ring of darker breast skin is called the areola. The raised tip within the areola is called the nipple. The nipple-areola complex (NAC) is a term that refers to both parts. The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Lymph fluid drains from breast tissue into lymph vessels and travels to lymph nodes near your armpit (axilla). Lymphatic fluid is a clear fluid that gives cells water and food. It also helps to fight germs. Nodes near the armpit are called axillary lymph nodes (ALNs). Ductal carcinoma in situ Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or intraductal carcinoma is found in the cells that line the ducts. Ducts are thin tubes that carry milk in the breast. DCIS is noninvasive cancer. Noninvasive means the cancerous cells are in place (in situ) and have not spread anywhere else. DCIS is a preinvasive disease. DCIS is treated to prevent invasive breast cancer, a more advanced form of cancer.
2099	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2100	Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers.
2101	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
2102	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
2103	To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests. Although you may not receive all of them, let’s look at each of these assessment tools in turn: Risk groups Your care team will look at the clinical characteristics of your cancer, such as your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, biopsy results, and other test results. From this information, your providers can classify your disease into one of five different risk groups, from very low risk to very high risk. Why do you need to know your risk group? Because your risk group is the basis for your prognosis. A prognosis predicts the likely course and outcome of a disease. Your prognosis guides your treatment options. For example, patients with lower risk generally get minimal treatment or no treatment at all. Patients with higher risk usually get more aggressive treatment. Test results and calculations—PSA level, Grade Group, tumor stage, and biopsy results—are put together to determine your risk group. PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer.
2104	They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor. Cancer in the lymph nodes is called nodal disease and is rare in bone cancer. NX – Cancer in nearby lymph nodes cannot be measured. N0 – There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes. N1 – Cancer is found in the regional lymph nodes. M Metastasis Bone cancer can spread through blood or the lymphatic system. Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is defined as MWhen cancer is not metastatic it is labeled as MBone cancer can spread to the lung, other bones, or other parts of the body. Bone cancer that has metastasized to the lung is still called bone cancer. M0 – No distant metastasis M1 – Distant metastasis is found • M1a – Metastasis is in the lung • M1b – Metastasis is in the bone or other distant sites The pelvis The pelvis is a basin-shaped structure that supports the spinal column and protects the abdominal organs. G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade.
2105	Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. It makes hormones that help regulate metabolism and other body functions. Thyroid cancers start as small, often round areas of abnormal growth called nodules. Most don’t cause symptoms and are benign. Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. The most well-known risk factors are radiation exposure and a family history of thyroid cancer. 2 Testing 9 TSH test 9 Ultrasound 10 Biopsy 11 Key points If a thyroid nodule is found or suspected, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) blood test and an ultrasound of the thyroid and neck are needed. Your doctor uses the results to decide whether a biopsy is needed. TSH test Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone made by the pituitary gland, located near the base of the brain. TSH controls the hormones made by the thyroid. A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous.
2106	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
2107	Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests.
2108	It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer. Cirrhosis can be caused by: Hepatitis B virus or infection Hepatitis C virus or infection h Alcohol use Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) h Genetic hemochromatosis Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis h Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency h Other causes of cirrhosis Guide 1 Risk factors for developing liver cancer Those with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program Risk factors for those with cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus or infection • Hepatitis C virus or infection • Alcohol use • Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) • Genetic hemochromatosis • Stage 4 primary biliary cholangitis • Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency • Other causes of cirrhosis Risk factors for those without cirrhosis: • Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or infection • Additional risk factors include HBV carrier with family history of liver cancer, Asian male assigned sex at birth 40 years of age or over, Asian female assigned sex at birth 50 years of age or over, and African/North American Black persons with hepatitis B Hepatitis Hepatitis is a type of liver disease.
2109	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
2110	Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too.
2111	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
2112	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
2113	h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. h Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a slowgrowing (indolent) lymphoma that typically forms tumors in the lymph nodes. However, FL can be found in other parts of the body. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes form clusters (follicles) in the germinal centers of lymph nodes. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. 2 Testing for FL Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Performance status Blood tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for FL biomarker and genetic changes Imaging tests Heart tests Key points Accurate testing is essential to diagnose and treat follicular lymphoma (FL). This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Follicular lymphoma (FL) might be found because of swollen lymph nodes or an enlarged spleen. Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans.
2114	The NCCN Guidelines are a work in progress that may be redefined as often as new significant data become available. NCCN makes no warranties of any kind whatsoever regarding its content, use, or application and disclaims any responsibility for its application or use in any way. NCCN Foundation seeks to support the millions of patients and their families affected by a cancer diagnosis by funding and distributing NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN Foundation is also committed to advancing cancer treatment by funding the nation’s promising doctors at the center of innovation in cancer research. For more details and the full library of patient and caregiver resources, visit NCCN.org/patients. About Hodgkin lymphoma What is lymphoma? What is the lymphatic system? Types of Hodgkin lymphoma 8 What can you do to get the best care? Hodgkin lymphoma is a highly curable cancer that usually starts in lymph nodes in the upper body. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 15 to 30, or after age What is lymphoma? Lymphoma is cancer that begins when white blood cells called lymphocytes grow out of control. Lymphomas are described as either Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a large and varied group of cancers.
2115	More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. Non-hormonal birth control methods (barrier methods, IUDs) are preferred after a breast cancer diagnosis.
2116	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
2117	The next chapter describes the different treatment options for advanced-stage prostate cancer. After that chapter, you’ll read about which of those treatments may be right for you and your particular type of cancer. Key points Tests are used to plan treatment and check how well treatment is working. An unusually high amount of PSA in the bloodstream may be a sign of prostate cancer. Imaging tests are used to see where the cancer has spread beyond the prostate. Imaging also shows the size and location of the cancer. A biopsy is a procedure that removes samples of cells or tissue, which are tested for cancer. A genetic test is used to find abnormal changes (mutations) in your genes. An inherited genetic mutation occurs in every cell in your body. A somatic mutation occurs all by itself and is only found in the cells of a tumor. To find out if you have an inherited risk for cancer, talk to your doctor about germline testing or ask to be referred to a genetic counselor. 3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer.
2118	The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. ALL is thought to arise from stem cells that make an increased amount of lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into a type of white blood cell called lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for ALL provides an overview of tests your child might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy.
2119	Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus. There are 2 main types of gray zone lymphomas: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) h Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Mediastinal lymphomas are growths found behind the breastbone (sternum) in the part of the chest that separates the lungs and holds the heart. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). They are treated differently. Primary mediastinal lymphomas are discussed in Chapter MGZLs are more commonly seen in those between 20 to 40 years of age, assigned male at birth. They are characterized by the presence of a large mediastinal mass. Lymph nodes above the collar bone (supraclavicular) may be involved. An expert hematopathologist review is essential to confirm the diagnosis of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma. Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas Non-mediastinal gray zone lymphomas occur in older persons, have a higher rate of bone marrow involvement, include disease outside the lymph nodes (extranodal disease), and have more advanced-stage disease than mediastinal gray zone lymphomas.
2120	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
2121	Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team. You’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making decisions with your team. Key points Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a cancer of lung cells. Cancers that spread to the lungs are not lung cancer. Early and locally advanced NSCLCs are cancers that have grown from the airways into lung tissue, and some have spread to lymph nodes. Treatment for NSCLC varies based on what is best for each person. When possible, surgery is used for primary treatment. 2 Lung nodules Lung nodule experts Risk for lung cancer Signs of lung cancer Planning follow-up care Types of follow-up care Follow-up of solid nodules Follow-up of subsolid nodules Planning to remove tissue Removing samples for cancer testing Confirming lung cancer Key points Many people have small masses of tissue in their lungs, called nodules. A nodule may have been found in your lung by chance. This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are.
2122	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
2123	It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers.
2124	Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen.
2125	You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Chemoradiation EBRT and chemotherapy are often used together to treat cervical cancer. They are given concurrently (during the same time period) in a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers. These cancers have grown beyond the cervix but have not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. As part of chemoradiation, there are typically 5 EBRT treatment sessions per week for 5 to 6 weeks. Chemotherapy is typically given once weekly during this time. See page 37 for more information on chemotherapy. Brachytherapy Also known as internal radiation therapy, brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. Brachytherapy allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount delivered to surrounding normal tissue. During brachytherapy, instruments are placed into the cervix, uterus, and vagina. A radioactive material then travels into the instruments that have been placed in the body. This method is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. Sometimes, additional instruments (catheters, or thin hollow tubes) are placed in the tumor itself or in tissues next to the tumor (interstitial brachytherapy).
2126	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
2127	Most are capsules that you swallow. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy doesn't work well against most thyroid cancers. It may be used for cancer that isn't responding to other treatment, or that has spread to distant areas of the body. It is most often used in combination with radiation therapy for anaplastic thyroid cancer—the least common and most aggressive type. Most chemotherapy medicines are put directly into the bloodstream through a vein. Systemic therapy side effects Side effects of systemic therapy can include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Constipation Hair loss Mouth sores Loss of appetite Low blood cell counts (white cells, red cells, and platelets) Side effects seen more often with targeted therapy include body aches, rash, high blood pressure, and abnormal bleeding. Some targeted therapies have serious side effects that can affect your heart, skin, and digestive system. If systemic therapy is planned, ask your care team for a complete list of potential side effects. Most side effects only occur during cancer treatment. But, some can start years later. For example, long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and not being able to have children.
2128	Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). Bone tumors often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly (the metaphysis). This book will discuss the following: Chondrosarcoma – starts in the cells that form cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones to form a smooth surface that makes a joint. Also, cartilage gives structure to the nose, ears, larynx, and other parts of the body. Chordoma – starts in notochordal cells that form the spine and vertebrae. Chordomas are usually found in the lower spinal column (sacrum) or at the base of the skull. Ewing sarcoma – starts in the bone marrow and commonly occurs in the diaphysis of long bones or flat bones like the pelvis or scapula (shoulder blade). Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) – is an overgrowth of cells found in the part of the bone called the metaphysis and extends into the area of the bone that widens to form a joint (epiphysis).
2129	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
2130	Include details about the specific type of cancer, treatment, and dates on your contact list. Ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. Test results Results from blood tests and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide Lung cancer basics What is NSCLC? What is early and locally advanced NSCLC?
2131	The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis.
2132	Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 7: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence Although the thyroid has been removed, cancer can return to the neck or to areas far from the neck. The return of cancer after treatment is called recurrence. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are targetable features of a cancer. Many are mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. For thyroid cancers with 1 or more specific biomarkers, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be a treatment option if needed. Biomarker testing involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. Testing for the following biomarkers is recommended for recurrent, advanced, or metastatic cancers that can't be treated with RAI therapy: h ALK gene fusion NTRK gene fusion BRAF gene mutations RET gene fusion (found in some medullary thyroid cancers) Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) Tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) Your provider may test for these individually or as part of a group. Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS).
2133	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
2134	You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or childcare due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Key points h Your treatment team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine doctor, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. Surgery is the main treatment for thyroid cancer. Active surveillance may be an option for very-low-risk cancers. RAI therapy may be used after total thyroidectomy to kill any remaining cancer cells. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine is needed lifelong after total thyroidectomy. About 1 in 3 people need hormone replacement after a lobectomy. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is used for more aggressive (anaplastic), recurrent, or metastatic cancers that can’t be removed surgically.
2135	Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues.
2136	A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine.
2137	This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed. In stage 1, the tumor has grown into the second or third (muscle) layer of the rectal wall. No further treatment is needed. In stage 2, the tumor has grown through the rectal wall and possibly into nearby tissues or organs. In stage 3, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. More treatment is almost always needed for stage 2 and 3 cancers. Next treatments may include chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or both. More information on chemotherapy is provided next. See page 24 for information on chemoradiation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Chemotherapy regimens used to treat rectal cancer are listed in Guide Any regimen that has “OX” in the name includes oxaliplatin. Oxaliplatin can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy) to your fingers and toes. Symptoms include numbness, cramping, tingling, or pain in these areas. Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
2138	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
2139	Hepatitis B and hepatitis C screening Hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are types of liver disease caused by a virus. A hepatitis blood test will tell your treatment team if you had hepatitis in the past or if you have it today. Some cancer treatments can wake up (or reactivate) the virus. If this happens, it can cause harm to the liver. Lung function tests Lung function tests or pulmonary function tests (PFTs) measure how well the lungs work. They measure how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air is moved into and out of the lungs. They also measure how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. Nutrition assessment You should meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition.
2140	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
2141	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2142	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
2143	However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer.
2144	Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML. If chemotherapy included bevacizumab For HR deficient cancers and BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with both bevacizumab and olaparib (a PARP inhibitor) is a recommended option. If you can't have olaparib, niraparib is given instead. For BRCA-mutated cancers, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is also an option. Maintenance therapy with bevacizumab alone is also an option for cancers not caused by a BRCA mutation, or whose BRCA status is unknown. If chemotherapy didn’t include bevacizumab If you have a BRCA mutation and chemotherapy didn't include bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor alone is recommended. For some stage 2 cancers with a BRCA mutation, observation may be an option. If you don't have a BRCA mutation (or have not had a BRCA test), maintenance therapy with niraparib or rucaparib may be an option, especially if the cancer is HRD-positive. Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last?
2145	Breast diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, MRIs, and other imaging tests, and performs needle biopsies as needed. Gynecologist diagnoses and treats diseases of the female reproductive organs. Lactation consultant specializes in breastfeeding. Mammogram, MRI, and ultrasound technologists operate the mammogram unit, or MRI or ultrasound machine. Advanced practice providers are nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse midwives who can help prevent, evaluate, examine, and diagnose human disease, including breast cancer. Obstetrician specializes in pregnancy and in childbirth. Pathologist analyzes the cells, tissues, and organs removed during a biopsy or surgery. • Primary care provider (PCP) or physician gives a wide range of care, including prevention and treatment. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs much more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully.
2146	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2147	 See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, it is called “regional” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 4 for more information on regional CSCC. Kno“wing there is treatment available gave me hope at diagnosis and for the future. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is most commonly caused by getting sunburns or spending too much time in the sun over many years. h An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin that has a higher chance of becoming squamous cell skin cancer. You may be more likely to get squamous cell skin cancer if you have actinic keratoses, a weakened immune system, or certain genetic syndromes. Squamous cell skin cancer can form in old wounds, burns, or scars. This is called Marjolin’s ulcer and it can be harder to treat. Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer.
2148	Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells.
2149	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
2150	Normal cells increase in number only when they’re needed, and they die when they’re old or damaged. Cancer cells don’t follow the rules. Cancer cells can multiply quickly and avoid dying. Cancer cells can crowd out normal cells and take their place. Eventually this damages the body and often results in symptoms. What causes a glioma? No one knows exactly what causes most brain tumors, including gliomas. What experts do know is that brain tumors often start with an abnormality (mutation) in certain cells. This abnormality causes these cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). This type of mutation happens on its own. It’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Gliomas occur in both children and adults. This book discusses gliomas only in adults. Are there types of gliomas? There are several types of glioma tumors. The 3 most common types are astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and glioblastomas. They’re made of different kinds of glial cells. Astrocytomas look like star-shaped glial cells called astrocytes. The main job of astrocytes is to maintain the chemical environment that allows communication between nerve cells. Oligodendrogliomas look like oligodendrocytes, which are glial cells that protect electrical signaling in nerve cells.
2151	This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells. Your surgeon will also take samples from nearby tissues where it looks like cancer hasn’t spread. This is done to check for cancer cells that have spread outside the ovaries or pelvis and can only be seen with a microscope. These are called microscopic metastases. The omentum and sometimes nearby lymph nodes will be removed. The omentum is the fatty layer of tissue that covers organs in the belly (abdomen). Lymph nodes are groups of disease-fighting cells where cancer can also spread. If there is fluid buildup in the abdomen, the fluid will also be sampled. If there isn’t fluid buildup, your doctor may “rinse” the space inside your belly with a special liquid. This is called a peritoneal washing. Samples of the liquid will then be tested for cancer cells. Preparing for surgery Your treatment team will give you instructions on how to prepare for surgery. You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery.
2152	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
2153	If the cancer is more invasive than expected during a lobectomy, the decision is usually made during surgery to remove the entire thyroid. After total thyroidectomy After surgery, everything that was removed or sampled (biopsied) is examined by a pathologist. Pathologic examination may find that the tumor is benign (not cancer). In this case, no more cancer treatment is needed. Lifelong thyroid hormone replacement therapy is needed, however. If pathologic examination confirms follicular or oncocytic thyroid cancer, further treatment depends on the results of surgery. RAI therapy may be used to kill cancer cells left in the body. See the next page for more information. If a concerning amount of cancer remains after surgery, there is more than one possibility. Options may include: Another surgery (preferred, if possible) RAI therapy Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Monitoring After treatment with one or more of the above, hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine is started. Hormone replacement therapy keeps the TSH level low or normal. After lobectomy Depending on the extent of cancer observed during surgery and the results of pathologic examination, you may have more surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid.
2154	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
2155	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
2156	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
2157	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2158	You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Seek out an oncology team that treats many cases of anal cancer a year. It’s a rare cancer, and you want the most knowledgeable team you can find to work with you and your healing. – Melissa Anal cancer survivor Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov Need help finding a clinical trial?
2159	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
2160	Fertility and pregnancy If you want the option of becoming pregnant in the future, talk to your care team about fertility-sparing treatment. It is typically only an option for small, early-stage cancers. Recommendations for fertility-sparing treatment are provided in Part 4: Treatment for common types. If fertility preservation is desired, talk to your doctor about seeing a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. Although natural pregnancy will not be possible, options to discuss may include ovarian transposition, egg or embryo freezing, and consideration of possible surrogate pregnancy in the future. Ovarian transposition Cervical cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Ovarian transposition before starting EBRT may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte preservation.
2161	Ovarian transposition This procedure moves one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical term for this procedure is oophoropexy. For more information on this topic, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines. Key points The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body. It is located in the pelvis, at the end of the large bowel. Anal cancer starts in either the anal cana or the perianal region. The anal canal is the small section of bowel between the rectum and the anus. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. The most common type of anal cancer is squamous cell carcinoma. It starts in squamous cells, which are found in the tissues that form the surface of the skin and in other areas of the body. The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with HPV. HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted virus.
2162	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
2163	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
2164	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
2165	In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma. Stool exits the body through the stoma and enters a bag attached to the skin. This is typically only needed for a short time. For colon cancer surgery, the colostomy can often be reversed with another operation. Colostomy is also known as diversion because it diverts (redirects) the flow of stool. Colostomy If the two healthy ends of the remaining colon cannot be safely reconnected after the cancer is removed, a colostomy may be performed. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening in your abdomen that allows stool to pass through. For colon cancer surgery, it is rare for a colostomy not to be reversed with another operation. Bowel blockage In rare cases, a tumor may grow so large that it blocks the flow of stool. There are several ways to deal with a blockage. One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy.
2166	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
2167	A history of smoking Having given birth more than once (called “high parity” or multiparity) Oral contraceptive (birth control) use Being sexually active at an early age A high number of sexual partners A history of sexually transmitted infection Certain autoimmune diseases A weakened immune system due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, for example Types of cervical cancer Most cervical cancers start in the ectocervix. The ectocervix is lined with squamous cells. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called a squamous cell carcinoma. About 2 out of 10 cervical cancers form in the endocervical canal. The endocervix is lined with cells that make mucus. These cells are referred to as glandular, gland-like, secretory, or columnar cells. Cancers that form in glandular cells are called adenocarcinomas. Less commonly, the cancer may contain both squamous and adenocarcinoma cells. These cancers are referred to as adenosquamous carcinomas. They are sometimes called “mixed” tumors. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma is the focus of Part The rarest and most aggressive type of cervical cancer is neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
2168	Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth. Oral mucosa The oral mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and lips. It is made up of 2 layers. Epithelium – The surface layer containing stratified squamous cells, which are thin, flat cells. Lamina propria – The bottom layer of connective tissue. A tumor can grow through the layers of the oral mucosa. A measure of how deep the tumor has grown is called depth of invasion (DOI). Depending on the region of the mouth, the epithelium may be nonkeratinized or keratinized. Nonkeratinized squamous epithelium covers the soft palate, inner lips, inner cheeks, the floor of the mouth, and area underneath the tongue. Keratinized squamous epithelium is present on rough surfaces caused by chewing such as the gums (gingiva) and hard palate as well as the top of the tongue. Head and neck cancer Head and neck cancer is a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
2169	3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer. This chapter describes the available treatment options and what you might expect from them. Talk with your care team about which treatment could be best for you. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with many treatment options. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy as well as non-hormone therapies like chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy. Often, hormone therapy is combined with one or more other therapies. Combining therapies can be more effective than using either therapy alone. key word in ADT is “deprivation”—this therapy “deprives” (starves) the cancer of its main fuel: androgens. This can shrink the tumor or slow tumor growth for a while. You might hear the term “castration” used when describing prostate cancer or its treatment. This term describes a drastic reduction of testosterone. Castration can be done with hormone-lowering medication or by surgical removal of one or both testicles (orchiectomy). Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles.
2170	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
2171	Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. Non-hormonal birth control methods (barrier methods, IUDs) are preferred after a breast cancer diagnosis. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms and IUDs to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Blood tests Blood tests check for signs of disease and how well organs are working. They require a sample of your blood, which is removed through a needle placed into your vein. Some blood tests you might have are described next. Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme found in the blood.
2172	How deep the tumor is The deeper the tumor has invaded into the skin, the higher the risk of the cancer returning after treatment or spreading to distant sites. Cancer cells in lymph or blood vessels If there are cancer cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels outside of the main tumor, it means that the cancer is more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes and other parts of the body. This is known as lymphovascular invasion. Weakened immune system People with a weakened immune system have a higher risk of getting CSCC, and they are at higher risk of cancer returning after treatment. Examples of conditions that weaken the immune system include long-term corticosteroid use, having human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS, or having received an organ transplant. Low-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) or shave excision Standard surgical excision Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA If you are not a candidate for surgery, treatment with radiation therapy is recommended if you can have it.
2173	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
2174	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
2175	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
2176	They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration. Lung cancers form from cells that line the airways of the lungs. The lungs' airways are called the bronchus, bronchioli, and alveoli. Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. They break the rules of cell growth. Cancer cells make many new cancer cells. They also do not die when they should. This overgrowth of cancer cells becomes a mass of tissue called a tumor. Cancer cells grow out of control. They can grow through the airway and into the lung tissue. They can grow through the lung wall and invade other body parts. Cancer cells can break away from a tumor and spread. They can enter the bloodstream or a fluid called lymph and spread to other places. This out-of-control cell growth can harm the body. Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer.
2177	The cancer cells crowd out and overpower normal cells. This can end up harming the body. Cancer cells survive much longer than normal cells do. They can replace many normal cells and cause organs to stop working well. Cancer cells can also spread outside the prostate to other areas of the body. The prostate gland is an important part of the male reproductive system. It’s located in the pelvis just below the bladder and is about the size of a ping-pong ball. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? A symptom is a feeling or problem that can indicate a disease or condition. Prostate cancer often grows slowly and shows no symptoms for a long time. But you don’t have to have symptoms to have prostate cancer. In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer.
2178	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2179	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
2180	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
2181	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
2182	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
2183	Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
2184	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
2185	Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up. There are many resources available that can improve mental health and wellness for cancer survivors. Social workers at your treatment site are often excellent resources to help connect you with mental health and financial resources. For more information see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines. Peer-to-Peer support The Anal Cancer Foundation’s Peer-To-Peer Support Program matches anal cancer patients and caregivers with trained peer volunteers for empathetic connection and practical advice throughout the process of diagnosis, treatment, and road to recovery. To be matched with a peer, please contact connect@analcancerfoundation.org Ostomy care If you have an ostomy, you may want to join an ostomy support group. Another option is to see a health care provider that specializes in ostomy care, such as an ostomy nurse. People with ostomies can still live very active lifestyles. However, it’s a good idea to consult with an ostomy professional before any vigorous or high-intensity physical activity. You will get through this. It might seem hard at times toward the end of treatment and the following weeks and months while you recover, but it will pass.
2186	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
2187	Organize your papers. Create files for insurance forms, medical records, and test results. You can do the same on your computer. Keep a list of contact information for everyone on your care team. Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you keep track your appointments and communicate with your care team. For possible tests, see Guide General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take.
2188	A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen. If needed, EUS may also be used to guide a biopsy of lymph nodes or other areas near the rectum. CT A computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest and abdomen is recommended as part of initial testing. CT can show if the cancer has spread to the liver, lungs, or other organs. Contrast will be used. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. A technician will be nearby. You will be able to hear and talk to them at all times. Endorectal ultrasound If you can't have a pelvic MRI (because you have a pacemaker, for example) or if MRI images were unhelpful, you may have an endorectal ultrasound instead. This test may also be ordered if your doctor knows the cancer has not grown far into the rectal wall. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children.
2189	Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment.
2190	They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. Regional lymph nodes are those located near the tumor. Cancer in the lymph nodes is called nodal disease and is rare in bone cancer. NX – Cancer in nearby lymph nodes cannot be measured. N0 – There is no cancer in nearby lymph nodes. N1 – Cancer is found in the regional lymph nodes. M Metastasis Bone cancer can spread through blood or the lymphatic system. Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is defined as MWhen cancer is not metastatic it is labeled as MBone cancer can spread to the lung, other bones, or other parts of the body. Bone cancer that has metastasized to the lung is still called bone cancer. M0 – No distant metastasis M1 – Distant metastasis is found • M1a – Metastasis is in the lung • M1b – Metastasis is in the bone or other distant sites The pelvis The pelvis is a basin-shaped structure that supports the spinal column and protects the abdominal organs. G = Grade Another factor used in staging is the cancer grade.
2191	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Biopsy A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid.
2192	It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. However, the test is quick and painless. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health issues. Bone x-ray An x-ray uses low-dose radiation to take one picture at a time. A tumor changes the way radiation is absorbed and will show up on the x-ray. X-rays are also good at showing bone issues. Your care team may order x-rays if your bones hurt or were abnormal on a bone scan. Diagnostic mammogram A mammogram is a picture of the insides of your breast. The pictures are made using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. A bilateral mammogram includes pictures of both breasts. Mammogram results are used to plan treatment. Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s).
2193	A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen. If needed, EUS may also be used to guide a biopsy of lymph nodes or other areas near the rectum. CT A computed tomography (CT) scan of your chest and abdomen is recommended as part of initial testing. CT can show if the cancer has spread to the liver, lungs, or other organs. Contrast will be used. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. A technician will be nearby. You will be able to hear and talk to them at all times. Endorectal ultrasound If you can't have a pelvic MRI (because you have a pacemaker, for example) or if MRI images were unhelpful, you may have an endorectal ultrasound instead. This test may also be ordered if your doctor knows the cancer has not grown far into the rectal wall. Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children.
2194	h A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node(s) that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB) might be done to look for cancer in your lymph node(s). Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Testing takes time. It might take days or weeks before all test results come in. 3 Breast cancer staging How breast cancer is staged TNM scores Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. It also takes into account hormone receptor and HER2 status. Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. At diagnosis, IBC is stage 3 or 4 disease. In stage 3, the tumor can be any size and in the lymph nodes, the lymph nodes can be fixed (or not moveable), or the cancer can involve the skin or chest wall.
2195	A chromosome translocation is the switching of part of one chromosome with another chromosome within the lymphoma cells. Uncommon FL When FL has uncommon pathologic (disease) features or is t(14;18)-negative, it might be called uncommon FL (uFL). It is treated as classic FL in this book. Pediatric-type FL Pediatric-type FL (PTFL) usually occurs in children but can also occur in adults. Usually, only one lymph node is enlarged in the head and neck region and there might be no symptoms. Transformed FL FL can transform into a more aggressive lymphoma called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). This means your slowgrowing FL has turned into a large-cell, fastgrowing lymphoma. Transformed FL can occur before, during, or after treatment. In DLBCL, tumors are commonly found in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other tissues and organs. Key points The lymphatic or lymph system is a network of tissues and organs that helps your body fight infections and disease. It is part of the immune system. h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation.
2196	Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). For stage 3 disease, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) may be used during ICS. HIPEC is a technique in which chemotherapy is warmed and then circulated in the spaces between the organs of the abdomen during surgery. If cancer improves after several cycles of chemotherapy, surgery is usually recommended. If cancer stays the same, your doctor may recommend proceeding with surgery or continuing chemotherapy to see if there is improvement. After surgery, more chemotherapy is usually given. Maintenance therapy may follow once your cancer is in remission. Staging The information gained during surgery and surgical staging is used to determine the pathologic (post-surgery) stage. The pathologic stage provides the most accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread. It is used to guide treatment after surgery. A staging system is a standard way of describing the extent of cancer in the body. There are 2 staging systems for ovarian cancer. One was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the other by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO). They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often.
2197	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
2198	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
2199	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
2200	You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others. Ask for the names and contact information of your care providers to be included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment may be improved if your primary care provider is involved. They can help manage other health conditions that may be affected by your cancer treatment. Your treatment plan There isn't one treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your care team agree on should be noted in the treatment plan, along with possible side effects. Keep in mind that your plan may change. Testing may provide new information. Your feelings about treatment may change. Side effects or other health conditions may prompt a change of plan. Key points The ovaries are a pair of grapesized organs in the pelvis. They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium.
2201	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
2202	LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow. Endocrine therapy will stop your body from making hormones or it will block what hormones do in the body. This can slow tumor growth or shrink the tumor for a period of time. Endocrine therapy is sometimes called hormone therapy. It is not the same as hormone replacement therapy used for menopause. There is one type of surgical endocrine therapy: Bilateral oophorectomy is surgery to remove both ovaries. Other main types of endocrine therapy include: Ovarian ablation uses radiation to permanently stop the ovaries from making hormones. Ovarian suppression uses drugs to temporarily stop the ovaries from making hormones. It is achieved with drugs called LHRH agonists. These drugs stop LHRH from being made, which stops the ovaries from making hormones. LHRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron Depot). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. h Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) stop a type of hormone called androgen from changing into estrogen by interfering with an enzyme called aromatase. They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries.
2203	Chemotherapy can also cause infertility in some cases by damaging sperm or eggs. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your doctor. There are ways to be able to have children after cancer treatment. This is called fertility preservation. If you are of childbearing age, your doctor will discuss any fertilityrelated risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about fertility preservation options. Some fertility preservation options are described below. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition This procedure moves one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical term for this procedure is oophoropexy.
2204	Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition Rectal cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Key points All rectal tumors should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For cancers with this biomarker, testing for an inherited cancer syndrome called Lynch syndrome is recommended. Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS).
2205	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
2206	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
2207	A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade. The grade is a rating of how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope. High-grade cancers grow and spread more quickly than low-grade cancers. The cancer grade is different than the stage. Stages are categories that describe where the cancer has or hasn't spread from the ovary. Surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing can provide a best guess of how far the cancer has spread before surgery. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for ovarian cancer takes a team of experts. When possible, a gynecologic oncologist should perform the initial surgery. This type of doctor is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers. Your care team may also include a medical oncologist. This doctor is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy and other medicines. You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others.
2208	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2209	Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the pictures and sophisticated computer software, the radiation team will plan the best radiation dose and number of treatments. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. Your radiation oncologist will devise a treatment plan to aim radiation beams at the anal tumor and lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin. You will be alone in the treatment room. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room. The technician will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. As treatment is given, you may hear noises. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Common side effects at the treatment site during the 5 to 6 weeks of radiation treatment include skin irritation, tenderness, redness, and sores or skin breakdown. Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist.
2210	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
2211	The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body. Stage 4A – There are cancer cells in the fluid around the lungs. This is called a malignant pleural effusion. • Stage 4B – Cancer has spread to the inside of the liver or spleen, to distant lymph nodes, or to other organs outside the abdomen. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of medicine(s) to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. When given before surgery, chemotherapy is called neoadjuvant therapy. When given after surgery, it is called primary or adjuvant chemotherapy. Platinum-based chemotherapy is recommended for ovarian cancer. These medicines contain the metal platinum. Carboplatin, cisplatin, and oxaliplatin are examples. One of these is often given with a different type of chemotherapy called a taxane. Paclitaxel and docetaxel are taxanes. Your options for chemotherapy will depend on your age and overall health. Your provider will also consider your risk for nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy. This common side effect of paclitaxel causes pain, tingling, and numbness, often in the hands and feet.
2212	Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes) fight infections. WBCs include granulocytes (or neutrophils), monocytes, and lymphocytes. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the organ that creates blood in our body. It is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. Stem cells multiply to maintain a supply throughout our lifetime. Some of these stem cells gradually develop into blood cells through a process called differentiation. At any given time, the bone marrow contains cells at various stages of development, from very immature to nearly mature. Once a blood stem cell fully develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released into the bloodstream as needed. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells.
2213	Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response 3 Throat cancer staging How throat cancer is staged TNM scores p16- (HPV-) cancer stages cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Testing for p16 (HPV) is an important part of staging. This chapter explains throat cancer stages. How throat cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Cancer staging is not the same for all cancer types and locations. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage.
2214	Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). SCC of the throat (oropharynx) is the focus of this book. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue found in the throat. 2 Testing for throat cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment p16 (HPV) testing Imaging tests Scoping procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment.
2215	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
2216	Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck. Moderately or very advanced disease – Cancer that has spread to parts of the neck such as the base of the skull, larynx, pharynx, bones and muscles behind the nasal cavity, jaw, and roof of the mouth. It might include cancer in the carotid artery. Metastatic – Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, including lung and distant lymph nodes. This might be referred to as very advanced disease. Not all stage 4 cancers are metastatic. p16- (HPV-) cancer stages p16- throat cancer starts in the oropharynx and is not caused by human papillomavirus (HPV). The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested.
2217	Your provider will also consider your risk for nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy. This common side effect of paclitaxel causes pain, tingling, and numbness, often in the hands and feet. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next treatment. The cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for most newly diagnosed stage 1 cancers. Observation may be an option for a stage 1A or 1B, low-grade tumor. Ask your doctor if this applies to your cancer. At this time, the preferred chemotherapy regimen is paclitaxel with carboplatin, given every 3 weeks. If you can't have this regimen, there are other recommended options. Six cycles of chemotherapy are recommended for high-grade serous tumors. Between 3 and 6 cycles are recommended for all other stage 1 tumors. The specific number of cycles needed depends on the tumor type and other factors. Stages 2, 3, and 4 For common tumor types, chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for all newly diagnosed stage 2, 3, and 4 ovarian cancers.
2218	Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda). Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves— such as x-rays—to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. The type of radiation therapy usually used for bladder cancer is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, a large machine aims radiation at the tumor area. Radiation therapy can be given alone but is more often given with other bladder cancer treatments: Chemoradiation Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are often used together to treat bladder cancer. When given together, they work better than they do alone. This is called chemoradiation or chemoradiotherapy. Like many cancer treatments, chemoradiation works better for certain people than for others. Trimodal therapy Trimodal therapy refers to a combination of three treatments: TURBT to remove all visible cancer, followed by radiation and chemotherapy given together (chemoradiation). In certain people with bladder cancer, trimodal therapy can be used instead of bladder removal surgery (radical cystectomy). This is why trimodal therapy is referred to as a "bladder preserving" treatment. Clinical trials Therapy may also be given as part of a clinical trial.
2219	You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Chemoradiation EBRT and chemotherapy are often used together to treat cervical cancer. They are given concurrently (during the same time period) in a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers. These cancers have grown beyond the cervix but have not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. As part of chemoradiation, there are typically 5 EBRT treatment sessions per week for 5 to 6 weeks. Chemotherapy is typically given once weekly during this time. See page 37 for more information on chemotherapy. Brachytherapy Also known as internal radiation therapy, brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. Brachytherapy allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount delivered to surrounding normal tissue. During brachytherapy, instruments are placed into the cervix, uterus, and vagina. A radioactive material then travels into the instruments that have been placed in the body. This method is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. Sometimes, additional instruments (catheters, or thin hollow tubes) are placed in the tumor itself or in tissues next to the tumor (interstitial brachytherapy).
2220	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
2221	Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. vaginal stenosis A condition in which the vagina becomes narrower and shorter. The lining of the vagina may also be thinner and drier and contain scar tissue. This can cause pain during sex and pelvic exams. Vaginal stenosis is often caused by radiation therapy to the pelvis or some types of surgery.
2222	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
2223	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
2224	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
2225	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, Side effects Managing side effects is a shared effort between you and your care team. It is important to speak up about bothersome side effects, such as nausea and vomiting. Ask about your options for managing or relieving the effects of treatment. More information on nausea and vomiting is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. which are found in the bowel, mouth, and blood. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy tends to cause more severe side effects than intravenous chemotherapy. This includes infections, kidney damage, pain in the belly, and nerve damage. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Ask your care team for a full list of common and rare side effects of the drugs you receive. Tell your care team about any medications or supplements you are taking. Some may interact with chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy Maintenance therapy is the use of systemic therapy after successful initial treatment for ovarian cancer. It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse.
2226	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
2227	Possible side effects of intravesical BCG therapy include fever, chills, the urge to Intravesical therapy Intravesical therapy is a treatment where a liquid medicine is placed directly into the bladder. The medicine aims to destroy any cancer cells that TURBT left behind and to prevent any new cancer cells from forming. urinate, pain or difficulty when urinating, and blood or particles (clots) in your urine. Talk to your treatment team about the side effects. There may be ways to help lessen these effects. If intravesical BCG doesn’t work on its own, a number of other treatment options are available in addition to treatment in clinical trials. Ask your provider or another member of your care team about these potential options. Intravesical chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a drug used to kill actively growing cancer cells. Intravesical chemotherapy is given to treat the cancer and to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Intravesical chemotherapy can be given soon after a TURBT procedure. The treatment is a one-time dose instilled within 24 hours of TURBT surgery. It’s meant to “clean up” any cancer cells that surgery may have left behind and to prevent any new cancer from growing.
2228	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
2229	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2230	If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made.
2231	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
2232	Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist. Over-the-counter ointments like Aquaphor or Silvadene can soothe the skin and help with healing. Other short-term side effects of radiation therapy include diarrhea, fatigue, frequent urination or pain while urinating, and nausea. Most of these decrease over time when treatment is over. Radiation therapy side effects may not be felt immediately. They can appear and worsen later in the cycle or even after it is complete. Radiation therapy for anal cancer can also have long-term and potentially serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. See “Fertility and family planning” on page 14 and Part 3: Survivorship for information on ways to help prevent, limit, or manage these effects. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of anti-cancer medicines. It is a type of systemic therapy. Most commonly, chemotherapy is given intravenously. This means the medicine(s) are slowly infused into the body through a vein. The medicine(s) travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can also be given orally. Radiation therapy An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer.
2233	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
2234	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
2235	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
2236	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
2237	If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Supportive care Supportive care is available to everyone with metastatic cervical cancer, regardless of whether you are in active treatment. Supportive care refers to a range of care and resources often needed by patients with metastatic cancer. Hospice care, access to pain specialists, and emotional and spiritual support are all components of supportive care. Because metastatic cancer cannot be cured, the main goal of supportive care is to make you more comfortable and to help keep the cancer under control. Supportive care may also help you live longer and feel better overall. When used for advanced cancers, supportive care is often called palliative care. You may also consider enrolling in a clinical trial. Ask your treatment team if there is an open clinical trial that you can join. Advance care planning Talking with your doctor about your prognosis can help with treatment planning. If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made.
2238	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
2239	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2240	If the cancer metastasizes after initial treatment that included radiation, radiation therapy cannot be used again to treat the same areas. Palliative radiation therapy may be an option if the cancer is causing symptoms. Palliative radiation therapy can limit the size of the tumor(s) and help with symptoms. If palliative radiation is planned, care will be taken to ensure that areas initially treated with radiation are not treated a second time. Progression If the cancer progresses during or after treatment with chemotherapy, immunotherapy is recommended if you are eligible. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Nivolumab (Opdivo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are immune checkpoint inhibitors currently used to treat metastatic anal cancer. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects - Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines. Stay calm, take care of your mental and emotional self, get organized, and be prepared to be your own advocate. Ask the hard questions. Start a notebook and take it to all appointments to note what is said and how you are doing along the way.
2241	This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA. Testing after diagnosis After a biopsy confirms anal squamous cell carcinoma, more testing is needed to plan treatment. Digital rectal exams are repeated. This section describes additional recommended testing after diagnosis. Lymph node exam There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes in the body. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Certain areas of the body contain more lymph nodes than others. The groin (where the thigh meets the abdomen) is one such area. Lymph nodes in the groin are called the inguinal lymph nodes. If left untreated, anal cancer cells can travel through lymphatics or blood to these groin lymph nodes or other lymph nodes in the pelvis, and then to other areas of the body. Lymph nodes cannot usually be seen or felt in the early stages of cancer, but may become enlarged as cancer progresses. Your doctor will examine lymph nodes in the groin by pressing on the surface of the skin. This is known as palpation.
2242	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
2243	Treatment without surgery is discussed in Chapter Clinical trials offer hope to all people with pancreatic cancer. Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Key points The pancreas is a gland that helps digest food and control blood sugar. h Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the ducts of the pancreas and are the focus of this book. h Some families share genes that increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. There are five stages of pancreatic cancer that range from stage 0 to stage Your cancer care team will make a treatment plan that is specific to you. Talk with your team about options for treatment and supportive care. Advocate for yourself Take steps to get the best care for you. Here are 3 ways to advocate for yourself: Read this book to learn about pancreatic cancer and its treatment. Use the questions in the back of the book to discuss and decide with your care team which care options are right for you. Choose a multidisciplinary team.
2244	What stage is metastatic cancer? Stage 4 pancreatic cancer is metastatic cancer, but other stages may become metastatic cancer over time. Metastatic pancreatic cancer has spread far from the pancreas. Is staging used to plan treatment for pancreatic cancer? Unlike other cancers, experts do not plan initial treatment mainly based on the five pancreatic cancer stages. Instead, they use a different system to decide treatment for cancers that are not metastatic. This system is described in Chapter What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? There’s no treatment for pancreatic cancer that’s best for everyone. The best treatment is the treatment that’s right for you. Your treatment plan should follow best practices— cancer care based on science and expert consensus. The following chapters explain the best practices of testing for and treating pancreatic cancer. Some people with stage 1, 2, or 3 pancreatic cancer have surgery to remove cancer from the body. Surgery is an option for more people now than in the past due to medical advances.
2245	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
2246	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
2247	There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells. Exocrine cells make and move digestive enzymes. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas form from exocrine cells that line the tube-like ducts of the pancreas. They are also called pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and are the focus of this book. Pancreas Sounds like PAN-kree-us. The pancreas is deep inside the body. It sits just below the liver and behind the stomach. In adults, the pancreas is about 6 inches long. Less often, pancreatic cancer forms from endocrine cells. Endocrine cells make hormones. Pancreatic cancer that forms from endocrine cells is called a neuroendocrine tumor. Information on pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the app NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer. What causes pancreatic cancer? Many people with cancer wonder how they got it. Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer.
2248	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
2249	If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a biopsy. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental -ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaws, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
2250	Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection. The use of Pap smears has resulted in much lower rates of cervical cancer in the United States. The cervix The cervix is the narrow, lower end of the uterus. The uterus is where a baby grows and develops before being born. During birth, the cervix opens (dilates) and thins (effaces) to allow the baby to move into the vagina. The vagina, or birth canal, is the muscular passage through which babies are born. An ovary and a fallopian tube are on each side of the upper uterus. The fallopian tubes connect to the top part of the uterus. The ovaries make eggs for sexual reproduction. They also make hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle. Eggs pass out of the ovary and travel through the attached fallopian tube into the uterus. The cervix, uterus, vagina, ovaries, and fallopian tubes are part of the female reproductive system. The female reproductive system The reproductive system is a group of organs that work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction.
2251	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
2252	An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned. Other imaging for these stages may include a pelvic MRI with contrast 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. Metastatic cancer For stage 4B or distant recurrences of cervical cancer, imaging is used mainly to learn how the cancer is responding to systemic therapy. Imaging may include CT, MRI, and/or PET/CT. Pap tests Depending on the type of surgery you have (if any), you may have annual Pap screening tests after treatment. Pap testing is helpful for finding new areas of abnormal and/or precancerous cells. It is not as good at detecting recurrent cervical cancer. Pap testing is also known as cervical or vaginal cytology. Blood tests If you have symptoms, or a physical exam was suspicious for recurrence, your doctor may order blood tests. In addition to a complete blood count (CBC), testing may measure blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels. These check your kidney function. Liver function tests may also be ordered. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors.
2253	A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas. Tumors larger than 4 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a walnut) and high-risk types of papillary cancer should also be treated with total thyroidectomy. Lymph nodes near the thyroid that are known to have cancer are also removed during surgery. There are other reasons your doctor may recommend a total thyroidectomy. Factors such as whether the neck area was ever treated with radiation therapy will be considered. If the cancer is small and noninvasive, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. Treatment with lobectomy is preferred if the following criteria are met: You’ve never had radiation therapy The cancer hasn’t spread at all beyond the thyroid. The tumor is 1 to 4 cm in size. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic exam of the removed tissues.
2254	In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous. For these lesions, surgery is often needed to make a final diagnosis. Now, molecular tests are available that can help determine whether the nodule is cancerous and whether surgery is necessary. Papillary carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid cancer, followed by follicular carcinoma, then oncocytic. Papillary, follicular, and oncocytic carcinomas are known as the differentiated thyroid cancers. Differentiated cancers usually grow and spread slowly. Treatment of these types is addressed in Chapter Medullary thyroid cancer is the third most common type of thyroid cancer. This type can be inherited, meaning it can run in families. Medullary thyroid cancer is the focus of Chapter Anaplastic thyroid cancer is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer. It is rare and most often affects older adults. This type is the focus of Chapter The type and other features of biopsied lesions are recorded in a pathology report. Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care.
2255	In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Soft Tissue Sarcoma, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. RCC subtypes Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer. RCC can be broken down into subtypes by looking at the cancer cells under a microscope. This is called histology. Tumor histology and other factors are an important part of choosing a treatment plan. Ask your care team about your cancer subtype. Clear cell RCC Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most common subtype. It occurs in about 7 out of 10 people with RCC. Under a microscope, clear cells look very pale or clear. Non-clear cell RCC Non-clear cell RCC is also called nccRCC There are several subtypes. Papillary RCC is the most common subtype of nccRCC (about 1 out of 10 people with RCC). Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different.
2256	A potential benefit of lobectomy is that thyroid hormone replacement therapy may not be needed. Or, a lower dose may be needed. Papillary thyroid cancer Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common of all the thyroid cancers. The most common subtype is “classic type.” Other subtypes that may grow and spread more quickly include: Follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer Tall-cell/columnar cell Hobnail Diffuse sclerosing Is surgery always needed? Some small papillary tumors (no bigger than a pea) may be safely monitored without surgery. This approach is known as active surveillance. The size of the cancer is monitored using ultrasound. For active surveillance to be an option, there also can't be any nearby lymph nodes suspicious for cancer, and the tumor can't be in a high-risk location (such as the back of the thyroid, butting up against the trachea). Thyroidectomy or lobectomy? If surgery is needed, either a total thyroidectomy or lobectomy is performed. Some papillary cancers should always be treated with total thyroidectomy. A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas.
2257	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
2258	A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging. If surgical staging is performed, the para-aortic lymph nodes are typically removed. Pelvic lymph nodes may or may not be removed. Treatment with all of the following is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers: Chemoradiation (EBRT and platinum chemotherapy) Brachytherapy If cancer is found in pelvic lymph nodes, EBRT will include the pelvis. If any para-aortic nodes are known or suspected to have cancer, EBRT will be given to a larger treatment area that includes these nodes as well. While treatment as described above is currently preferred for stage 1B3 and 2A2 cancers, surgery is sometimes recommended. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Surveillance After finishing treatment, you will have testing to look for early signs of possible recurrence. This is known as surveillance. The information that follows applies to surveillance for common types of cervical cancer and for small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
2259	A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging. If surgical staging is performed, the para-aortic lymph nodes are typically removed. Pelvic lymph nodes may or may not be removed. Treatment with all of the following is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers: Chemoradiation (EBRT and platinum chemotherapy) Brachytherapy If cancer is found in pelvic lymph nodes, EBRT will include the pelvis. If any para-aortic nodes are known or suspected to have cancer, EBRT will be given to a larger treatment area that includes these nodes as well. While treatment as described above is currently preferred for stage 1B3 and 2A2 cancers, surgery is sometimes recommended. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Surveillance After finishing treatment, you will have testing to look for early signs of possible recurrence. This is known as surveillance. The information that follows applies to surveillance for common types of cervical cancer and for small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
2260	Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes. Cervical cancer generally spreads to these nodes first. Lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic nodes, are also sometimes removed. Pre-treatment surgical staging If the cancer has spread beyond the cervix, a hysterectomy is not performed but pelvic and/ or para-aortic lymph nodes may be removed and tested before any treatment is given. Knowing whether pelvic or para-aortic nodes contain cancer can help guide treatment decisions for more advanced cancers. A minimally invasive approach is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is referred to as laparoscopic surgical staging. External beam radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. EBRT is given in small doses, called fractions. An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths.
2261	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment.
2262	For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing. A pathologist is a doctor who is an expert in testing cells to find disease. The pathologist views the samples with a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the cells are cancerous, the pathologist notes their appearance and other features. Prior surgery or biopsy The cancer may have been found during a surgery or biopsy performed by another doctor. In this case, your treatment team will need to review the prior surgery and testing results. A pathologist will examine the tumor tissue with a microscope to make sure it is ovarian cancer. Your doctors will also want to know if any cancer was left in your body after surgery. Family history and genetic testing Ovarian cancer usually occurs for unknown reasons. However, about 1 in 6 ovarian cancers is caused by mutations (changes) in genes that are passed down from parent to child. This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2).
2263	The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix.
2264	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2265	T0 – No tumor is found, but neck lymph nodes test positive for Epstein-Barr virus. Tis – This is carcinoma in situ, meaning that cancerous cells are found only in the squamous cell layer. T1 – Tumor is confined to the nasopharynx or has grown into the oropharynx and/or nasal cavity, but not into the parapharyngeal space. The parapharyngeal space is a triangular area near the pharynx (throat), between the base of the skull and the hyoid bone (the bone under the tongue). It is in the deep tissues of the neck and contains mostly fat, as well as blood vessels (including the carotid artery and jugular vein), nerves, lymph nodes, and parts of the salivary (spit) gland. T2 – Tumor has grown into parapharyngeal space, and/or nearby soft tissue (muscles such as the medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, and prevertebral muscles) Cervical cancer basics The cervix Cervical changes Risk factors Types of cervical cancer Key points Cervical cancer is a common cancer of the female reproductive system. Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection.
2266	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
2267	Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches.
2268	If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction?
2269	It can reduce the risk of cancer returning or extend the time until it returns or gets worse. Maintenance therapy is an option for stage 2, 3, and 4 cancers that respond well to surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. PARP inhibitors (PARPi) are a newer option for maintenance therapy after initial treatment. These oral targeted therapies work best in homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)- positive cancers, including those caused by a BRCA mutation. PARP inhibitors currently used for maintenance therapy after initial treatment of ovarian cancer include: Olaparib (Lynparza) Niraparib (Zejula) Rucaparib (Rubraca) The most common side effects of PARP inhibitors are similar to those caused by chemotherapy. They include fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and low blood cell counts. Rare but serious side effects include myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Myelodysplastic syndrome is a cancer in which the bone marrow does not make enough healthy blood cells. There are abnormal cells in the blood and/or bone marrow. Acute myeloid leukemia is a fast-growing disease in which too many immature white blood cells are found in the bone marrow and blood. In some cases MDS can become AML.
2270	It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion.
2271	Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer. Fewer than 1 out of 20 people with bladder cancer are eligible for a partial cystectomy. It can only be done if the cancer is in a spot that can be neatly removed without taking out the whole bladder. Types of urinary diversion If your bladder is removed, urine needs another way to leave your body. This requires an additional surgical procedure called a urinary diversion. There are 3 types of urinary diversions: Ileal conduit In this urinary diversion, the surgeon removes a section of the small intestine (ileum) to use as a tube (or conduit). The surgeon also creates a small hole, called a stoma, in the abdominal wall. One end of the tube is connected to the ureters, much like the bladder was. The other end of the tube is attached to the stoma. Urine drains from the kidneys and ureters, passes through the tube, and exits the body through the stoma. Urine can trickle out of the stoma at any time.
2272	It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles. Every person generates a fixed amount of creatinine every day based on how much muscle they have. It is filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. The level of creatinine in the blood tells how well the kidneys are working. Higher levels of creatinine mean the kidneys aren’t working as well as they were when someone had lower levels of creatinine. Blood urea nitrogen Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a waste product filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. A high level of BUN can be a sign your kidneys aren’t working well. Electrolytes Electrolytes help move nutrients into cells and help move waste out of cells. Electrolytes are ions or particles with electrical charges that help the nerves, muscles, heart, and brain work as they should. Your body needs electrolytes to function properly. Lactate dehydrogenase Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or lactic acid dehydrogenase is an enzyme found in most cells. Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH.
2273	In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Depth and size of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Throat cancer stages are based on if the cancer is p16-positive or p16-negative (p16-). A p cancer is one that is HPVrelated (HPV-mediated). Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery.
2274	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
2275	A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas. Tumors larger than 4 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a walnut) and high-risk types of papillary cancer should also be treated with total thyroidectomy. Lymph nodes near the thyroid that are known to have cancer are also removed during surgery. There are other reasons your doctor may recommend a total thyroidectomy. Factors such as whether the neck area was ever treated with radiation therapy will be considered. If the cancer is small and noninvasive, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. Treatment with lobectomy is preferred if the following criteria are met: You’ve never had radiation therapy The cancer hasn’t spread at all beyond the thyroid. The tumor is 1 to 4 cm in size. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic exam of the removed tissues.
2276	After lobectomy Depending on the extent of cancer observed during surgery and the results of pathologic examination, you may have more surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid. If the cancer is invasive, removing the rest of the thyroid is recommended. For less invasive or minimally invasive cancer, surgery to remove the rest of the thyroid is one option. An alternative is to take a watch-and-wait approach and monitor the cancer. If this option is planned, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-bycase basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. If the nodule removed during lobectomy is benign, monitoring is recommended. In some cases, you may receive levothyroxine to keep your TSH level normal. Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body.
2277	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
2278	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
2279	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
2280	These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypT How cancer can spread Nasopharyngeal cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, and areas such as the nasal cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, base of the skull, jaw, and roof of the mouth. Anatomy of the Pharynx TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage throat cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage.
2281	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2282	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
2283	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2284	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2285	Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out support groups at your local hospital, through social media, or from those listed in the back of this book. Look to friends, relatives, neighbors, and coworkers for social support. encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a “MyChart” or health record account if it’s available, which will help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe.
2286	A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia. However, these may not be the genetic changes you were born with. Therefore, a skin punch biopsy is used. In this procedure, a small piece of skin and connective tissue is removed to get DNA that hasn’t been altered by AML. This will be used to see if you inherited genes that increase your risk of leukemia. Leukemia predisposition syndrome can affect how your body responds to treatment. Blood and saliva can be used when AML cells disappear (in remission). Biological family members who are possible hematopoietic cell donors might be tested for leukemia predisposition syndrome. Testing of cells not affected by your leukemia (like skin) can help tell if you have a leukemia predisposition syndrome. AML mutation testing Mutation testing using methods such as karyotype (or cytogenetics), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), next-generation sequencing (NGS), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) look for changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells (genes and chromosomes).
2287	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. "Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation." Key points Tests are used to plan treatment and check how well treatment is working. Some types of treatment for bone cancer can affect fertility.
2288	PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or have immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself. Tumor p16 (HPV) testing HPV testing by p16 is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. It is used to learn more information about your cancer. Testing will be done on a biopsy of your tumor from either your throat, a lymph node, or other sites in your body if needed. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations.
2289	EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide. Inhibiting (blocking) EGFR may keep cancer cells from growing. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is an EGFR inhibitor used to treat CSCC and other cancers. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy stimulates the activity of the immune system, which can improve the body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapies used to treat CSCC and other cancers are known as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) inhibitors. PD-1 inhibitors are a type of immune checkpoint inhibitor. Cemiplimab (Libtayo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are PD-1 inhibitors used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. Uses for systemic therapy Systemic therapy is not often used by itself to treat squamous cell skin cancer. It may be used in combination with radiation therapy to treat CSCC that can’t be removed using surgery. Systemic therapy alone may also be an option if both surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. In this case, immunotherapy with a PD-1 inhibitor is preferred. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used.
2290	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
2291	Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system.
2292	The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials. Some doctors order biomarker testing early in the course of treatment. Many doctors wait and order it only if the cancer returns or spreads. Testing should be performed on tumor tissue removed during a biopsy or surgery when possible. Otherwise, a sample of blood may be tested instead. Other names for this testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, and comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). Testing for PD-L1 expression is recommended for everyone with recurrent, progressive, or metastatic cervical cancer. If the PD-L1 level exceeds a set cutoff point, the cancer is considered PD-L1-positive. If needed, treatment with certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies may be an option for PD-L1–positive tumors. The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for.
2293	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself.
2294	The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials. Some doctors order biomarker testing early in the course of treatment. Many doctors wait and order it only if the cancer returns or spreads. Testing should be performed on tumor tissue removed during a biopsy or surgery when possible. Otherwise, a sample of blood may be tested instead. Other names for this testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, and comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). Testing for PD-L1 expression is recommended for everyone with recurrent, progressive, or metastatic cervical cancer. If the PD-L1 level exceeds a set cutoff point, the cancer is considered PD-L1-positive. If needed, treatment with certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies may be an option for PD-L1–positive tumors. The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for.
2295	At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) cisplatin paclitaxel Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) carboplatin + paclitaxel The preferred first-line regimen for all other metastatic cervical cancers is: h Cisplatin paclitaxel bevacizumab Pembrolizumab is an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). Bevacizumab is a type of targeted therapy called a biologic that is designed to work with chemotherapy. Other recommended first-line regimens include different combinations of cisplatin (or carboplatin), topotecan, paclitaxel, and/or bevacizumab. Second-line or beyond If you cannot have more platinum-based chemotherapy, there are other options. Treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is preferred for cancers with one of the following biomarkers: TMB-H PD-L1–positive MSI-H/dMMR For cancers with a biomarker other than those listed above, immunotherapy or targeted therapy may be an option. Biomarkers and their related systemic therapies are listed in Guide For cancers without any of the biomarkers in Guide 1, preferred options include: Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak), and Cemiplimab (Libtayo). If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app.
2296	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
2297	Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes. Before or during PDEMA, your doctor may consider a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). An SLNB is used to identify the first lymph nodes where cancer might have spread. The surgeon uses a harmless dye and a low-level radioactive solution to find the sentinel nodes. The nodes are then removed and tested for signs of cancer. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA removes the cancer, but other concerning features are noted during surgery, a discussion with different cancer doctors is recommended to determine next steps. Treatment with radiation therapy will be considered. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA does not remove all of the cancer, a discussion between different cancer doctors is recommended to consider next treatment options. If another surgery can be performed, this is often tried first. Otherwise, radiation therapy is recommended. In some cases, systemic therapy is used in addition to radiation. Platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation if you can have it.
2298	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
2299	It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away. Possible signs of IBC: Peau d’orange (pitted or dimpled appearance of skin) Skin thickening (skin has an orange-peel texture) Edema (swelling caused by excess fluid in body tissue) Erythema (reddening of the skin, usually in patches) Inflammatory breast cancer In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. Like other breast cancers, IBC can happen in those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue.
2300	Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully. Breast cancer screening saves lives by detecting cancer earlier, when it can be treated more successfully. When I first discovered the small hard pebble under the skin of my chest wall, I felt sort of silly asking for so much testing for such a tiny bump. But, nearly 10 years later, I realize that this changed my life and may be the reason why I am still here today!” 2 Screening and diagnostic tests Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer Inflammatory breast cancer Key points Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare, aggressive cancer where cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place.
2301	A chromosome translocation is the switching of part of one chromosome with another chromosome within the lymphoma cells. Uncommon FL When FL has uncommon pathologic (disease) features or is t(14;18)-negative, it might be called uncommon FL (uFL). It is treated as classic FL in this book. Pediatric-type FL Pediatric-type FL (PTFL) usually occurs in children but can also occur in adults. Usually, only one lymph node is enlarged in the head and neck region and there might be no symptoms. Transformed FL FL can transform into a more aggressive lymphoma called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). This means your slowgrowing FL has turned into a large-cell, fastgrowing lymphoma. Transformed FL can occur before, during, or after treatment. In DLBCL, tumors are commonly found in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other tissues and organs. Key points The lymphatic or lymph system is a network of tissues and organs that helps your body fight infections and disease. It is part of the immune system. h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation.
2302	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
2303	Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up. There are many resources available that can improve mental health and wellness for cancer survivors. Social workers at your treatment site are often excellent resources to help connect you with mental health and financial resources. For more information see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines. Peer-to-Peer support The Anal Cancer Foundation’s Peer-To-Peer Support Program matches anal cancer patients and caregivers with trained peer volunteers for empathetic connection and practical advice throughout the process of diagnosis, treatment, and road to recovery. To be matched with a peer, please contact connect@analcancerfoundation.org Ostomy care If you have an ostomy, you may want to join an ostomy support group. Another option is to see a health care provider that specializes in ostomy care, such as an ostomy nurse. People with ostomies can still live very active lifestyles. However, it’s a good idea to consult with an ostomy professional before any vigorous or high-intensity physical activity. You will get through this. It might seem hard at times toward the end of treatment and the following weeks and months while you recover, but it will pass.
2304	The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. For stage 1B1 cancers that do not meet the criteria for cone biopsy, radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B2 Fertility-sparing surgery is not performed often for stage 1B2 cancers. Because most research on fertility-sparing surgery applies to smaller tumors, abdominal surgery is generally preferred. Treatment after surgery If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended.
2305	After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors.
2306	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
2307	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
2308	Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers. Health history and physical exam To help plan treatment, expect your doctor to ask about your past and current health, including: Illnesses, diseases, and surgeries Medicines that you take (prescription or over-the-counter) Your lifestyle (your diet, activity level, whether you smoke or drink alcohol) Possible symptoms of cervical cancer, such as watery vaginal discharge Your doctor will also do a physical exam of your body, which may include: Checking your vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature) and overall appearance Feeling and/or listening to the organs in your abdomen, including your liver and stomach h A pelvic examination to check the size, position, and appearance of your cervix and uterus It is important to let your doctor know if you have trouble with pelvic exams due to pain, anxiety, or other reasons. Blood tests The following blood tests may be ordered as part of initial testing.
2309	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2310	Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis. The goal is to cure the cancer by removing all of the organs to which cancer has or may spread. All remaining organs of the female reproductive system are removed during pelvic exenteration. This includes the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and vagina. Nearby organs in the pelvis including the bladder, rectum, and/or anus may also be removed. If the bladder and/or organs involved in bowel function are removed, a diversion is typically performed. Diversions are surgical procedures that divert (redirect) urine and/or stool to new openings through which they exit the body. Vaginal reconstruction It is often possible to reconstruct the vagina after pelvic exenteration. A surgeon can create an artificial vagina using muscle from another area of your body. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominus is often used for vaginal reconstruction. This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion.
2311	The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis.
2312	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2313	Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery. While you may not get these side effects, you should be aware of them as you consider the benefits and risks of different treatments: h Sexual dysfunction – Treatment or cancer itself may interfere with your ability to have sex. Sexual dysfunction also includes a decreased desire to have sex. This may be due to a lack of energy, being self-conscious about your body after surgery, or feeling stressed out and depressed. Trouble controlling the flow of urine – Urine may come out when you’re not expecting it. This is referred to as urinary incontinence. But there are things you can do, like pelvic floor exercises, that can help you regain control of urine function. Many side effects can be managed. Some can even be prevented. Ask your treatment team for a complete list of short- and long-term side effects and information on how to manage them. Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences.
2314	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2315	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2316	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2317	Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist. Sexual health Sexual side effects can occur after anal cancer treatment, including: Difficulty getting an erection Reduced sex drive (libido) Vaginal dryness Pain during sex Narrowing and shortening of the vagina Vaginal dilator therapy Radiation therapy to the pelvic area can cause the vagina to become shorter and narrower. This is called vaginal stenosis. Vaginal stenosis can make it uncomfortable or even painful to have sex, or to have vaginal examinations by a doctor. Vaginal dilator therapy can help during and after radiation therapy. A vaginal dilator is a device used to gradually stretch or widen the vagina. Vaginal dilators are not one-size-fits-all. Different sizes are available, as are dilator kits containing different size devices. The size of the dilator can be increased over time as the vagina lengthens and widens. Sexual health therapists While it may be uncomfortable to talk about sexual health, keep in mind that these side effects are common and can often be managed or lessened. Consider seeing a sexual health therapist.
2318	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
2319	These cancers may be treated as earlystage (with surgery) or as locally advanced (with chemoradiation and brachytherapy). At this time, treatment with chemoradiation is preferred. See the next page for more information on this option. If surgery is planned, radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may also be removed. Treatment after surgery After surgery, the pathologic (surgical) stage of the cancer is determined by examining the removed tissue. The following information applies to the stages below, as determined by surgery: Stage 1 Stage 2A If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended.
2320	Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed. If the results suggest that the cancer was not completely removed, you may have another cone biopsy. Or, your doctor may recommend radical trachelectomy. For stage 1A1 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation should also be performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1A2 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1A2 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 centimeters, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is performed in addition to the cone biopsy. For stage 1A2 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1B1 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1B1 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met.
2321	Removing only a portion of the cervix may be an option for the earliest stage of cervical cancer. In most cases, however, the entire cervix must be removed. While this can sometimes be performed through the vagina, an abdominal incision (cut) is usually needed. When the surgery is performed through a traditional (big) incision through the abdomen, the approach is known as laparotomy. Minimally invasive (also called laparoscopic) surgery involves making only a few small cuts into your body. There is usually less pain and scarring compared to surgery that uses a larger cut through the abdomen. The time it takes to recover is also usually shorter. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped section of the cervix that includes tissue from both the ectocervix and endocervix. It is a recommended treatment option for some small cervical cancers. See Part 2: Testing and staging for more information on cone biopsy. Trachelectomy Trachelectomy is surgery to remove the cervix. The upper part of the vagina and pelvic lymph nodes may also be removed. Trachelectomy is a fertility-sparing surgery. The uterus and ovaries are left intact, allowing for the possibility of natural pregnancy in the future.
2322	Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed. This depends on the following factors: The size and shape of the polyp The polypectomy results The results of testing the removed tissue Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your provider will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Sessile polyps are more likely to return after treatment. Imaging with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for these polyps to help guide decisions about surgery. Early rectal cancer If cancer that formed in a polyp isn't found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, surgery is needed. Surgery is also needed for rectal cancer that forms as a lesion on the rectal wall. The true extent of the cancer can't be known until after surgery. But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options.
2323	During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended.
2324	Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes. Cervical cancer generally spreads to these nodes first. Lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic nodes, are also sometimes removed. Pre-treatment surgical staging If the cancer has spread beyond the cervix, a hysterectomy is not performed but pelvic and/ or para-aortic lymph nodes may be removed and tested before any treatment is given. Knowing whether pelvic or para-aortic nodes contain cancer can help guide treatment decisions for more advanced cancers. A minimally invasive approach is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is referred to as laparoscopic surgical staging. External beam radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. In external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), a large machine aims radiation at the cancer site. The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. EBRT is given in small doses, called fractions. An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths.
2325	Stage 2A2 cancers are larger than 4 cm. Stage 2B cancer has grown into the parametrium. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the cervix and uterus. Stages IIA1 and lIA2 Cervical Cancer Stage lIB Cervical Cancer Stage 3A cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the lower third of the vagina. Stage 3B cervical cancer The cancer has grown into the pelvic wall and/or has caused kidney swelling or dysfunction. Stage 3C cervical cancer There is cancer in lymph nodes near the cervix (pelvic lymph nodes) and/ or in lymph nodes in the abdomen, called the para-aortic lymph nodes. Stage 4A cervical cancer The cancer has spread to nearby organs, such as the bladder or rectum. Stage 4B cervical cancer The cancer is metastatic. It has spread to the liver, lungs, abdomen, bone, or other distant sites or lymph nodes. Cancer care plan Your treatment team Treatment for cervical cancer often involves a team of experts, including a gynecologic oncologist, a medical oncologist, and a radiation oncologist. A gynecologic oncologist is an expert in surgery and chemotherapy for female reproductive cancers. A medical oncologist is an expert in treating cancer with chemotherapy.
2326	Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes is called “regional”. Your care team will test suspicious lymph nodes to determine how far the disease has spread. Testing could also include scans of your upper body, stomach, and pelvis to check for any metastatic disease (spread) to those areas. The best way to treat regional CSCC is with surgery to remove the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. Radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy is often given after surgery to kill leftover cancer cells. If surgery is not possible or not recommended, radiation therapy, systemic therapy, or a combination of both may be options. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may harm critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. Although it is uncommon, squamous cell skin cancer can metastasize. Metastatic CSCC that cannot be removed with surgery and/or radiation is treated with systemic therapy. Systemic therapy options for metastatic CSCC include immunotherapy or a systemic therapy given in a clinical trial. If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy.
2327	EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide. Inhibiting (blocking) EGFR may keep cancer cells from growing. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is an EGFR inhibitor used to treat CSCC and other cancers. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy stimulates the activity of the immune system, which can improve the body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapies used to treat CSCC and other cancers are known as programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) inhibitors. PD-1 inhibitors are a type of immune checkpoint inhibitor. Cemiplimab (Libtayo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) are PD-1 inhibitors used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. Uses for systemic therapy Systemic therapy is not often used by itself to treat squamous cell skin cancer. It may be used in combination with radiation therapy to treat CSCC that can’t be removed using surgery. Systemic therapy alone may also be an option if both surgery and radiation therapy are not possible or were not successful. In this case, immunotherapy with a PD-1 inhibitor is preferred. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used.
2328	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
2329	Some people with no known risk factors develop anal cancer. And, some people with risk factors never get anal cancer. Risk factors for anal cancer are described next. Human papillomavirus infection The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is a sexually transmitted virus. HPV is extremely common. It affects almost everyone who has ever been sexually active. Most people are unaware that they are–or ever were–infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In some people, however, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Doctors are still learning why one person gets anal cancer and another does not. Cancers caused by HPV include anal, cervical, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (called strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to anal cancer and other related cancers. High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals.
2330	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
2331	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
2332	For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor.
2333	Capecitabine can cause a side effect known as hand-foot syndrome. Symptoms include redness, swelling, and pain on the palms of the hands, bottoms of feet, or both. Sometimes blisters appear. Your dose of capecitabine may be changed at the earliest signs of hand-foot syndrome. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 23 for next steps. We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better: NCCN.org/patients/feedback Perianal cancer (stages I – III) This section provides treatment recommendations for stages I, II, and III perianal cancer. Stages I through III are nonmetastatic, meaning the cancer has not spread beyond the pelvis. See page 26 for information on metastatic anal cancer. Like anal canal cancer, most perianal cancers are treated with chemoradiation. However, local excision (surgery) may be an option for some early-stage, low-risk perianal cancers. Local excision involves removing only the tumor and a small area of surrounding tissue. Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers.
2334	Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers. Stage I and II anal cancers have not invaded nearby lymph nodes. See page 13 for more information on cancer staging. For local excision to be an option, the cancer must not have invaded the sphincter muscle. The cancer grade is also important when determining if local excision is an option. The cancer grade is a rating of how fast the cancer is expected to grow and spread. It is based on how abnormal the cancer cells look when viewed under a microscope. Higher scores mean that the cancer is likely to grow and spread quickly. There are 5 possible grades: GX: Grade cannot be assessed (undetermined grade) G1: Well differentiated (low grade) G2: Moderately differentiated (intermediate grade) G3: Poorly differentiated (high grade) G4: Undifferentiated (high grade) Local excision should only be considered for low-grade (G1) and intermediate-grade (G2) perianal cancers. The normal tissue surrounding the lesion removed during surgery is called the surgical margin. If a margin of at least 1 cm is removed and it does not contain cancer cells, no further treatment is needed. The cancer will be observed.
2335	Other organs in the pelvis include The anus The anus is the opening through which stool exits the body. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. the bladder, uterus, ovaries, vagina, and prostate gland. Anal cancer starts in either the anal canal or the perianal region. The anal canal connects the rectum and the anal opening. It is about 1 and a half inches (4 centimeters) long. The anal canal is surrounded by muscles (anal sphincters) that relax to allow stool to leave the body through the anus. The perianal region includes the anal opening and the skin directly surrounding it. In some cases, an anal tumor can involve both the anal canal and the perianal skin. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors develop anal cancer. And, some people with risk factors never get anal cancer. Risk factors for anal cancer are described next.
2336	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core.
2337	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
2338	Your provider will also consider your risk for nerve damage, called peripheral neuropathy. This common side effect of paclitaxel causes pain, tingling, and numbness, often in the hands and feet. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next treatment. The cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for most newly diagnosed stage 1 cancers. Observation may be an option for a stage 1A or 1B, low-grade tumor. Ask your doctor if this applies to your cancer. At this time, the preferred chemotherapy regimen is paclitaxel with carboplatin, given every 3 weeks. If you can't have this regimen, there are other recommended options. Six cycles of chemotherapy are recommended for high-grade serous tumors. Between 3 and 6 cycles are recommended for all other stage 1 tumors. The specific number of cycles needed depends on the tumor type and other factors. Stages 2, 3, and 4 For common tumor types, chemotherapy is recommended after surgery for all newly diagnosed stage 2, 3, and 4 ovarian cancers.
2339	This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells. Your surgeon will also take samples from nearby tissues where it looks like cancer hasn’t spread. This is done to check for cancer cells that have spread outside the ovaries or pelvis and can only be seen with a microscope. These are called microscopic metastases. The omentum and sometimes nearby lymph nodes will be removed. The omentum is the fatty layer of tissue that covers organs in the belly (abdomen). Lymph nodes are groups of disease-fighting cells where cancer can also spread. If there is fluid buildup in the abdomen, the fluid will also be sampled. If there isn’t fluid buildup, your doctor may “rinse” the space inside your belly with a special liquid. This is called a peritoneal washing. Samples of the liquid will then be tested for cancer cells. Preparing for surgery Your treatment team will give you instructions on how to prepare for surgery. You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery.
2340	See page 17 for treatment information. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 22 for next steps. Follow-up and surveillance After finishing treatment for anal cancer, you will have testing to find early signs that cancer may have returned. This is called surveillance. Surveillance for the return of anal canal cancer and perianal cancer is the same. A follow-up physical exam with digital rectal examination (DRE) and anoscopy is recommended 8 to 12 weeks after completing chemoradiation to check the results of treatment. Your doctor may also order imaging tests. Depending on the results, the cancer is assigned to 1 of the following categories: Complete remission – there are no signs of cancer in the body Persistent disease – cancer remains in the body but has not grown or spread Progressive disease – the cancer has grown or spread Complete remission If initial follow-up testing finds no signs of cancer, recommended surveillance going forward is described below. Digital rectal exams DREs are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment. Lymph node exams Inguinal lymph node exams are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment.
2341	Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different. My motto is to ‘live fearlessly’ and ignore those fears the internet can give you." In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma's growth, reduce its symptoms, and prolong life. Key points Cancer is what happens when cells grow out of control. Lymphocytes are white blood cells that fight infections. A lymphoma is an abnormal overgrowth (cancer) of lymphocytes. Primary CNS lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that most often affects the brain. But it can also occur in the spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or the eyes. Primary CNS lymphoma can spread to other areas in the nervous system but it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. h A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. Having an impaired immune system is a risk factor for developing primary CNS lymphoma. h A lymphoma located in the central part of the brain can cause leg or arm weakness, coordination or movement difficulties, changes in personality or behavior, memory problems, and other symptoms.
2342	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
2343	A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein. The radiotracer puts out a small amount of energy that is detected by the machine that takes pictures. Cancer cells appear brighter because they use sugar faster than normal cells. PET is very good at showing small groups of cancer cells. This test may also be useful for showing if ovarian cancer has spread. Chest x-ray A chest -ray can show if cancer has spread to your lungs. It may be ordered with other tests when ovarian cancer is first suspected or found. It may also be used to check treatment results. A chest x-ray is fast and painless and uses small amounts of radiation. Diagnostic laparoscopy If the cancer is advanced, you may have a diagnostic laparoscopy before treatment. The goal is to learn how much cancer is in the abdomen. It helps your doctors to decide whether surgery can be the first treatment, or if chemotherapy is needed first. This minimally invasive procedure involves making a tiny cut in the abdomen.
2344	These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans. PSMA/PET PSMA/PET imaging is a special kind of PET imaging that locates a protein called prostatespecific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. PSMA/PET is especially useful for detecting cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes or has metastasized to farther areas. It’s also used to monitor prostate cancer that may return after treatment (recurrence). So, someone with early-stage prostate cancer may not need PSMA/PET imaging when first diagnosed. Your team will discuss whether a PSMA/PET scan could be helpful for your specific cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastases, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream.
2345	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
2346	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2347	Guide 1 Possible tests Medical history and physical exam (H&P) by multidisciplinary team. Medical photographs will also be taken. Complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) including liver function tests (LFTs), and alkaline phosphatase Biopsy with pathology review Determine tumor status including: • Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) hormone receptor (HR) status • HER2 status Address fertility, birth control, and sexual health concerns Genetic counseling and testing if at risk for hereditary breast cancer Imaging: • Diagnostic mammogram. Ultrasound and breast MRI, as needed • Chest CT. Contrast might be used. • CT or MRI of abdomen with or without pelvis. Contrast will be used. • Bone scan or PET-CT Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes.
2348	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET-CT scan. It may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. Sodium fluoride PET-CT A sodium fluoride PET-CT might be used instead of a bone scan. In this test, the radiotracer is made of sodium fluoride. FDG PET-CT An FDG PET-CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET-CT may not be needed. FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis.
2349	Then a long, thin needle is inserted into the lower part of the spinal column to remove cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is then sent to a lab for testing. More imaging It’s uncommon for primary CNS lymphoma to spread outside of the central nervous system or the eyes. Still, it’s important to have a look at the rest of your body just to be sure. The imaging methods most commonly used for this are positron emission tomography (PET) and/ or computed tomography (CT). PET imaging uses a small amount of a radioactive drug to find cancer cells in the body. After the radioactive drug is injected into a vein, it causes cancer cells to show up as bright spots on PET scans. A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended to look for cancer that has spread to these areas. A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan).
2350	Imaging If biopsy results confirm that the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, a computed tomography (CT) scan of lymph nodes near the CSCC is recommended. The goal is to learn about the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. More advanced imaging tests like a PET/CT, that uses special injectable agents to detect cancer, may be needed to see if cancer has spread farther than the lymph nodes, or to help plan treatment. Testing Biopsy If lymph nodes near the CSCC feel swollen or look abnormal on initial imaging tests, the next step is a biopsy. The types of biopsies used for squamous cell skin cancer are fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and core needle biopsy. FNA is also known simply as needle biopsy. Surgical evaluation The results of testing will be considered in order to determine if you are a candidate for surgery to remove the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have.
2351	The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells. The radioactive part of the tracer lets your care team see how your cells are using the Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) A very common type of skin cancer Occurs more often in lighter-skinned people Is commonly found in areas of the body exposed to sun, especially the head and neck Rarely spreads to distant areas of the body Can spread in the area where it first forms If not treated can cause severe skin damage and even death Most people (over ) can be cured by completely removing the CSCC substance. This helps them find any usage that is not normal. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan.
2352	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. Like an MRI and CT, a PET scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. A PET appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more detailed image. These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans.
2353	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
2354	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
2355	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
2356	This book will focus on cancer of the oropharynx and will refer to the oropharynx as the throat. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of the throat, and the base of the tongue found in the throat. PartsoftheOropharynx The oropharynx The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of the throat, and the back (base) of the tongue. This book will refer to the oropharynx as the throat. The pharynx The pharynx is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and opens into the larynx and esophagus. The pharynx has 3 parts: the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx. Anatomyof thePharynx Head and neck cancers Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started.
2357	Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase II trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase III trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase IV trials study the long-term safety and benefits of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it.
2358	Ask the hard questions. Start a notebook and take it to all appointments to note what is said and how you are doing along the way. I even asked if I could record some of those early appointments so I could play them back later. – Thom Anal cancer survivor Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
2359	Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase II trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase III trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase IV trials study the long-term safety and benefits of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it.
2360	Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase II trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase III trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase IV trials study the long-term safety and benefits of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it.
2361	Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase II trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase III trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment. If the results are good, it may be approved by the FDA. Phase IV trials study the long-term safety and benefits of an FDA-approved treatment. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in specific ways and that the trial is as safe as possible for the participants. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining. All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it.
2362	It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence.
2363	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
2364	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
2365	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
2366	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
2367	It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov/ Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Key points Photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, and topical therapy are treatment options for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions).
2368	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
2369	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
2370	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
2371	You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can. Start with the online resources listed in the back of this book. 2 Tests for primary CNS Tests for diagnosis Tests after diagnosis What’s next? Key points Different tests are needed to identify primary CNS lymphoma and to make a treatment plan. The key to confirming the diagnosis is removing a small sample of the tumor tissue and testing it. Many diseases have signs and symptoms similar to primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, including neurological illnesses and other types of brain cancer. So it’s important to have tests to confirm your diagnosis. If you're given a diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll have more tests to find out how far the cancer extends within the central nervous system or if it has spread to another area of the body. Tests are also used to help plan your treatment. Tests for diagnosis If you haven’t yet been diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma, you’ll first have a physical examination and some general assessments of your health.
2372	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2373	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
2374	Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist. Sexual health Sexual side effects can occur after anal cancer treatment, including: Difficulty getting an erection Reduced sex drive (libido) Vaginal dryness Pain during sex Narrowing and shortening of the vagina Vaginal dilator therapy Radiation therapy to the pelvic area can cause the vagina to become shorter and narrower. This is called vaginal stenosis. Vaginal stenosis can make it uncomfortable or even painful to have sex, or to have vaginal examinations by a doctor. Vaginal dilator therapy can help during and after radiation therapy. A vaginal dilator is a device used to gradually stretch or widen the vagina. Vaginal dilators are not one-size-fits-all. Different sizes are available, as are dilator kits containing different size devices. The size of the dilator can be increased over time as the vagina lengthens and widens. Sexual health therapists While it may be uncomfortable to talk about sexual health, keep in mind that these side effects are common and can often be managed or lessened. Consider seeing a sexual health therapist.
2375	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
2376	5-FU is given by continuous (constant) infusion over several days. You do not need to stay at a treatment center during this time, however. Before chemotherapy begins, a thin, flexible tube will be inserted into a vein in your upper chest, below the collarbone. This is referred to as a “port.” Using a small wire and often x-ray guidance, the tube is guided to a large vein above the right side of the heart. Some people receive a temporary PICC line instead. A PICC line is a deep IV that stays in the arm for the duration of treatment. The 5-FU is stored in a small, wearable pump connected to the catheter. The pump infuses the medicine into the body very slowly, over several days. The tube, called a central venous catheter, stays in place for the duration of treatment. It allows you to receive chemotherapy with 5-FU from home. The first 5-FU infusion starts when radiation therapy begins and lasts for 4 to 5 days. You will have another 4- to 5-day infusion at the start of week 5 of radiation therapy. The pump will be disconnected and removed between infusions.
2377	A sample of your blood or bone marrow will be used to see if the AML cancer cells have any specific mutations. Some mutations may determine the type of treatment given. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA. FISH can look for changes (abnormalities) that are too small to be seen with other methods. It can only be used for known changes. Since this test doesn’t need growing cells, it can be performed on either a bone marrow or blood sample. Sometimes, a bone marrow sample is needed to get all the information the care team needs to help plan your treatment. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of your chromosomes. Karyotype A karyotype is a picture of chromosomes. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. A karyotype will show extra, missing, rearranged, or abnormal pieces of chromosomes. Since a karyotype requires growing cells, a sample of bone marrow or blood must be used. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
2378	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
2379	You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture.
2380	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
2381	Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. Breast MRI If needed, a breast MRI will be used in addition to a mammogram. Contrast should be used. You will be positioned face down in the machine with your arms above your head. Spine and brain MRI An MRI can be used to detect breast cancer that has spread (metastasize) to your spine or brain. For a brain MRI, a device is placed around your head. For a spine MRI, no device is worn. Contrast should be used in an MRI. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed picture. Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body.
2382	Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think!
2383	However, not everyone has elevated levels of these markers and tumor markers alone are not a reliable method of detecting breast cancer. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). TMB-H can be used to help predict response to cancer treatment using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing A sample of your tumor or blood may be used to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Certain mutations such as PIK3CA can be targeted with specific therapies. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR).
2384	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2385	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
2386	This is part of your cancer care. Eye exam Sometimes, nasopharyngeal cancer can affect the eyes. An eye exam might be recommended before starting treatment. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
2387	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
2388	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
2389	When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still.
2390	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
2391	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
2392	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
2393	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
2394	These cancers may be treated as earlystage (with surgery) or as locally advanced (with chemoradiation and brachytherapy). At this time, treatment with chemoradiation is preferred. See the next page for more information on this option. If surgery is planned, radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may also be removed. Treatment after surgery After surgery, the pathologic (surgical) stage of the cancer is determined by examining the removed tissue. The following information applies to the stages below, as determined by surgery: Stage 1 Stage 2A If testing finds no cancer in tissue beyond the cervix or in lymph nodes removed during surgery, there are 2 options. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is recommended for cancers with risk factors. Observation is recommended for cancers without risk factors. Your doctor will consider the tumor size, whether there is LVSI, and other factors when determining if EBRT is a good choice for you. If EBRT is planned, platinum chemotherapy may be given during the same time period. This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended.
2395	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Locally advanced cancer This section describes treatment options for cervical cancer that has grown beyond the cervix but has not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. Cancers that are close to spreading beyond the cervix (stage 1B3) are also considered locally advanced. Locally advanced cancers are not metastatic. The information in this section applies to the following stages: Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 2B Stage 3 Stage 4A Locally advanced cancers are more likely to have spread to lymph nodes than early-stage cancers. Knowing whether lymph nodes in the pelvis or abdomen contain cancer can help guide treatment with EBRT for these cancers. You may have extra imaging to look for lymph nodes with cancer. Another approach is to surgically remove and test lymph nodes before any treatment is given. A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging.
2396	Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes. Before or during PDEMA, your doctor may consider a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). An SLNB is used to identify the first lymph nodes where cancer might have spread. The surgeon uses a harmless dye and a low-level radioactive solution to find the sentinel nodes. The nodes are then removed and tested for signs of cancer. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA removes the cancer, but other concerning features are noted during surgery, a discussion with different cancer doctors is recommended to determine next steps. Treatment with radiation therapy will be considered. If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA does not remove all of the cancer, a discussion between different cancer doctors is recommended to consider next treatment options. If another surgery can be performed, this is often tried first. Otherwise, radiation therapy is recommended. In some cases, systemic therapy is used in addition to radiation. Platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation if you can have it.
2397	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
2398	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
2399	The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest. The lungs move important gases in and out of the blood. You breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide (a gas made by cells) from the body. The lungs have sections called lobes. The left lung has 2 lobes and the right lung has 3 lobes. A thin layer of tissue surrounds the lungs called the pleural membrane. This membrane protects the lungs. Two large breathing tubes, called bronchi, connect the windpipe (trachea) to the lungs. There is one tube, called a bronchus, for each lung. Inside the lungs are small tubes (bronchioles) and small air sacs (alveoli). The respiratory system The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood.
2400	Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found. Chapter 6: BPDCN discusses treatment of an aggressive subtype of AML. BPDCN can be found in blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and/or skin. Chapter 7: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of an AML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask.
2401	This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that can help guide treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the rectal tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either: mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as: microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for inherited mutations in the mismatch repair genes (explained next). Family health history Most rectal cancers occur for unknown reasons. While rare, some people are born with a gene mutation that makes them more likely to get rectal and other cancers. People born with Lynch syndrome, for example, are at high risk of developing colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. Lynch syndrome is caused by inherited mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations in the MMR genes. If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome.
2402	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
2403	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
2404	This chapter explains treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to areas far from the rectum. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the rectal wall. Adenomas are the most common type. While it may take many years, they can become invasive cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Often, no further Polyps Polyps are growths on the lining of the bowel wall. Pedunculated polyps look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed.
2405	This chapter explains treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to areas far from the rectum. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the rectal wall. Adenomas are the most common type. While it may take many years, they can become invasive cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Often, no further Polyps Polyps are growths on the lining of the bowel wall. Pedunculated polyps look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed.
2406	The term colorectal cancer is used to describe cancers that form in either the colon or rectum. While these cancers are similar, their treatment is different. The focus of this guide is rectal cancer. For information on colon cancer treatment, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colon Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum The rectum is about 5 inches (12 centimeters) long and forms the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps Key points Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive rectal cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. This is the most common type of rectal cancer. Polyps that rarely turn into cancer include hyperplastic and inflammatory polyps. While most polyps do not become cancer, almost all rectal cancers start in a polyp. Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy.
2407	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
2408	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
2409	This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep). Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to which cancer cells most likely spread from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there is more than one sentinel lymph node. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a surgery that removes tissue samples to examine sentinel nodes. The lymph nodes will be checked for cancer cells by a pathologist in a lab. Sometimes people can have an SLNB at the same time as surgery. The results will be used to stage the cancer and plan treatment. To locate the sentinel lymph node(s), your surgeon will inject a radioactive, blue-colored substance into your skin near the tumor. The substance will drain into the sentinel lymph nodes. Your surgeon will identify the sentinel lymph nodes using a device and remove them through a small cut in your skin. This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches.
2410	For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. The ECOG PS scores range from 0 to PS 0 means the person is fully active. PS 1 means the person is still able to perform light to moderate activity, but with some limitations. PS 2 means the person is limited to the chair or bed less than half of the time and is still able to care for self. PS 3 means the person is limited to the chair or bed more than half of the time. PS 4 means the person is totally confined to the bed or chair and completely unable to care for self. PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor.
2411	The neuropathologist can see this under the microscope. For example, an astrocytoma looks like cells called astrocytes. And an oligodendroglioma looks like oligodendrocytes. 66 Brain tumors are insidious because the symptom burden can feel like an attack on the very nature of the self, including personality changes, language and memory impairment, physical impairment, and poor prognosis.” Grade Another way that gliomas are classified is by grade. The grade indicates how quickly the glioma is likely to grow and spread. Tumors are graded from 1 to 4 based mostly on how much the tumor cells look like normal cells. Low-grade gliomas include grades 1 and High-grade gliomas include grades 3 and Grades are used to predict the outlook (prognosis) of the tumor and to plan treatment. Grade 1 tumors grow slowly and are usually benign. Many people with grade 1 gliomas can be treated with surgery alone. But if the tumor grows back, additional therapy may be given. Grade 1 gliomas are more common in children than in adults. Grade 2 tumor cells look somewhat abnormal. These tumors grow slowly and can invade normal tissue. They may not grow back for many years.
2412	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
2413	Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances.
2414	Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye. While both blue light cystoscopy and narrow-band imaging may potentially detect tumors better than standard white light, they’re relatively new and still in the “testing phase.” More research will show whether they can replace or be used with white light as the standard detection method. Types of imaging include x-rays, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound. CT scan A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a series of cross-sectional images. To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have a CT scan of your abdomen and pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the lower abdomen located between the hip bones; it contains reproductive organs as well as the bladder and rectum. A CT scanner is a large machine that has a tunnel in the middle. During the test, you’ll lie on a table that moves slowly through the tunnel. Pillows or straps may be used to help keep you still during the test.
2415	Then a long, thin needle is inserted into the lower part of the spinal column to remove cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is then sent to a lab for testing. More imaging It’s uncommon for primary CNS lymphoma to spread outside of the central nervous system or the eyes. Still, it’s important to have a look at the rest of your body just to be sure. The imaging methods most commonly used for this are positron emission tomography (PET) and/ or computed tomography (CT). PET imaging uses a small amount of a radioactive drug to find cancer cells in the body. After the radioactive drug is injected into a vein, it causes cancer cells to show up as bright spots on PET scans. A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a single detailed image. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended to look for cancer that has spread to these areas. A contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream before the scan to make the areas of cancer easier to see. Sometimes PET is combined with CT (a PET/ CT scan).
2416	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
2417	PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment.
2418	If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. The possible grades are 1, 2, or Cervical dysplasia becomes cancer when the abnormal cells invade the muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining (the cervical stroma). An area of dysplasia or cancer is also referred to as a lesion. Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Cervical changes Cervical dysplasia refers to areas of abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix. Lowgrade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) refers to mild dysplasia (CIN 1). High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) refers to moderate or severe dysplasia (CIN 2 and 3). HSIL is considered a pre-cancer. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the risk of developing a disease. Some people with no known risk factors may develop cervical cancer, while others with risk factors may not. HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI).
2419	Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus. The tumor may be very small (2 centimeters or less, which is about the size of a peanut) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced cancer has invaded the esophagus wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near or in direct contact with the esophagus. Metastatic cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, distant lymph nodes, lung, bone, and brain. Key points Most esophageal cancers start in cells that line the inside of the esophagus and secrete mucus. These esophageal cancers are called adenocarcinomas. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. The esophagus wall is made up of 4 main layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and tunica adventitia. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, pre-cancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Early-stage esophageal cancer is contained in the esophagus.
2420	It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov/ Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Key points Photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, and topical therapy are treatment options for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions).
2421	They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion. Photodynamic therapy In photodynamic therapy (PDT), a lightsensitive drug is applied to the area. When exposed to light (either red or blue light in the doctor’s office, or shaded outdoor light), the drug becomes active and kills cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy A drug applied to the skin becomes active and kills cancer cells when exposed to light. Common side effects of PDT include itching or burning when the liquid is applied, pain during the red or blue light exposure, and itching and redness for a few days after treatment. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy (also called cryosurgery) freezes and destroys precancerous and cancerous cells using a very cold liquid or tool. Liquid nitrogen is often used. Cryotherapy sometimes causes a burning sensation during treatment. A blister and scab will form, which heals over 2 to 3 weeks. Skin darkening or lightening can happen while it is healing. Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses.
2422	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
2423	Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility. It can happen to people of any gender. You may receive a referral to a fertility specialist. A fertility specialist is an expert in helping people have babies. They can explain how you may be able to have a baby during or after treatment. Collecting and freezing sperm or eggs is a common method. More information on fertility preservation can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cancer treatment can impact one's ability to have children. Before starting treatment, talk with a fertility counselor to learn what your options are for fertility preservation. What’s a prognosis? Prognosis is the likely course and outcome of a disease based on tests. Prognosis is used to predict how the cancer will turn out. Some people with CLL want to know the prognosis, but others don’t. Tell your care team what information you do and do not want to know.
2424	Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia.
2425	It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test. The types of contrast vary but are different for CT than for MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and prednisone (steroids), to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys are not working well. MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. It does not use x-rays. Contrast might be used. An MRI may be used as an initial test, to check treatment results, and to see if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected.
2426	Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs.
2427	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation in adolescents and young adults is available at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Changes in fertility Treatment might cause your fertility to be temporarily or permanently impaired or interrupted. This loss of fertility is related to your age at time of diagnosis, treatment type(s), treatment dose, and treatment length. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Preventing pregnancy during treatment Preventing pregnancy during treatment is important. Cancer and cancer treatment can affect the ovaries and damage sperm. Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended.
2428	You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery. On the day of your surgery, you will be given medicine to put you into a deep sleep so you won’t feel pain. This is called general anesthesia. Surgery may take 3 or more hours to complete. More or less time may be needed depending on how much tissue is removed. After the surgery, expect to stay in the hospital for a few days or weeks to recover. You may feel some pain and tenderness in your belly and pelvis. It may last for a few days or weeks. You may be able to return to normal activities in a few weeks. The time it takes to fully recover varies from person to person. It also varies depending on the extent of the surgery. Premature menopause If you have not entered menopause, surgery that removes both ovaries will cause it. This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body.
2429	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
2430	Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone. Menstrual periods may stop during treatment (called amenorrhea) and for up to 2 years after treatment, but often return in those 35 years of age and under. Endocrine therapy What is primary CNS lymphoma? What causes primary CNS lymphoma? How is primary CNS lymphoma diagnosed? Can primary CNS lymphoma be cured? What’s next? Key points Being diagnosed with a brain tumor can be frightening and overwhelming. This book will help you make sense of all the information that’s out there. It will also describe your options for treatment. Taken together, you’ll have the confidence to make wellinformed decisions. What is primary CNS lymphoma? Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a rare and aggressive cancer that affects the central nervous system (CNS). Let’s break it down word by word to understand it better: Primary – Primary means first. When talking about cancer, primary refers to the place where cancer first started. Primary CNS lymphoma starts in the central nervous system. Central nervous system – The CNS is made up of the brain and spinal cord.
2431	Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer). Adrenal cancer is a rare cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. Adrenal cancer, also called adrenocortical cancer (ACC), can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones from the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, hereditary conditions have been linked to an increased risk of developing an adrenal tumor. 2 Testing 12 Test results 13 General health tests 14 Imaging tests 15 Blood tests 16 Genetic tests 16 Biopsy 17 Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Testing is used to diagnose and plan treatment for adrenal tumors. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Adrenal tumors will be diagnosed based on a series of test results.
2432	You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. What is blood? AML is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
2433	Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment.
2434	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
2435	It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. However, the test is quick and painless. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones as it moves over your body. Areas of bone damage take up more radiotracer than healthy bone and show up as bright spots on the pictures. Bone damage can be caused by cancer, cancer treatment, previous injuries, or other health issues. Bone x-ray An x-ray uses low-dose radiation to take one picture at a time. A tumor changes the way radiation is absorbed and will show up on the x-ray. X-rays are also good at showing bone issues. Your care team may order x-rays if your bones hurt or were abnormal on a bone scan. Diagnostic mammogram A mammogram is a picture of the insides of your breast. The pictures are made using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. A bilateral mammogram includes pictures of both breasts. Mammogram results are used to plan treatment. Diagnostic mammograms look at specific areas of your breasts, which may not be clearly seen on screening mammograms. They are used to see tumor and the size of the tumor(s).
2436	You will continue to take levothyroxine to keep your TSH level down. To learn whether you are eligible for treatment with a targeted therapy or immunotherapy, biomarker testing is recommended. This testing is described in more detail on page Recommended targeted therapies for metastatic cancer that can't be treated with surgery or RAI are listed in Guide Other systemic therapies are available and may be recommended if those listed in Guide 1 aren't available or appropriate. Joining a clinical trial is strongly encouraged for everyone with metastatic thyroid cancer. About bone cancer 5 What is bone cancer? 6 What is bone? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Bone cancer includes a group of cancers that start in the bone or cartilage. This is called primary bone cancer and differs from other types of cancers that can spread (metastasize) to the bone. This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers.
2437	In this procedure, a hollow needle is inserted into the bone (usually at the back of the hip bone) and a sample of marrow is removed. The marrow sample is then sent to a lab for testing. What’s next? After you’ve been diagnosed and have gone through further testing to find out the extent of your lymphoma, your treatment team will discuss your results with you. You’ll also talk about your choices for treatment. The next chapter explains the different options for treating primary CNS lymphoma. Don’t dismiss your distress Depression, anxiety, and distress are very common in people with cancer (and their caregivers, too). About 1 in 3 patients with primary brain tumors develop clinical depression and anxiety at some point. Up to 3 out of 4 people with primary brain tumors experience psychological distress. Tell your treatment team if you’re feeling stressed or overwhelmed. Ask them for help. You don’t have to cope with it by yourself. Read more about cancer and distress in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points A biopsy is the main test to diagnose primary CNS lymphoma.
2438	Your doctor will want to know if you have enough red blood cells to carry oxygen throughout your body, white blood cells to fight infection, and platelets to control bleeding. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures important chemicals, proteins, and other substances in your blood. Levels that are too high or low could be a sign of a health problem in areas like the kidneys or liver. Who’s on your multidisciplinary care team? Treating bladder cancer takes a team approach. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your cancer treatment, while others will be there for parts of it. Your team should communicate and work together to bring the best knowledge from each specialty. This is called multidisciplinary care. Depending on your diagnosis, your multidisciplinary team may include a dozen or more specialists and care providers: Your primary care doctor handles medical care not related to your cancer. Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs.
2439	Add it to your phone. Hang the list on your refrigerator or keep it in a place where someone can access it in an emergency. Keep your primary care physician informed of changes to this list. In your contact list, include information on your exact type of cancer, as well as any treatments and the date each treatment started. Set up an online patient portal (MyChart or health record account) if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Remember, many times, the portal messages are not immediately seen by a nurse or physician. Be sure to ask your care team how best to communicate with them, especially in an emergency. More information on these tests is on the following pages. For possible tests, see Guide Hodgkin Lymphoma in Adults About the NCCN Guidelines for Patients ® Did you know that top cancer centers across the United States work together to improve cancer care? This alliance of leading cancer centers is called the National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . Cancer care is always changing. NCCN develops evidence-based cancer care recommendations used by health care providers worldwide.
2440	You may also receive care from registered nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, social workers, genetic counselors, sexual health experts, and others. Ask for the names and contact information of your care providers to be included in the treatment plan. Cancer treatment may be improved if your primary care provider is involved. They can help manage other health conditions that may be affected by your cancer treatment. Your treatment plan There isn't one treatment plan that is best for everyone. There is often more than one option, including clinical trials. Clinical trials study the safety and effectiveness of investigational treatments. The treatment that you and your care team agree on should be noted in the treatment plan, along with possible side effects. Keep in mind that your plan may change. Testing may provide new information. Your feelings about treatment may change. Side effects or other health conditions may prompt a change of plan. Key points The ovaries are a pair of grapesized organs in the pelvis. They make hormones and eggs for sexual reproduction. Most ovarian cancers affect the layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium.
2441	Ask your care team about the risks and benefits of each option. Together, you and your team can make a treatment plan. There’s no single drug or procedure that’s best for treating primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma. The best treatment is the one that works best for you. Treatment options include corticosteroids, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell rescue. Receiving treatment in a clinical trial is also a recommended option. Therapies are often combined to treat cancer. For example, chemotherapy may be given with an immunotherapy drug, or several chemotherapy drugs may be given together. Chemotherapy is also an essential part of having a stem cell rescue. Surgery is not normally an option. Because primary CNS lymphoma usually develops deep within the brain tissue, removing it with surgery is risky and may be more harmful than helpful. Treatment is usually given in phases (which are discussed in the next chapter). Clinical trial NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. Clinical trials are a key way to assess new treatment approaches.
2442	What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it. Although no one knows exactly what causes a lymphoma, we do know that lymphomas often start with a genetic abnormality (mutation) in certain lymphocytes. This abnormality causes these lymphocytes to grow out of control (become cancerous). The abnormality occurs on its own. It’s not a mutation that occurs in other cells or organs in your body. And it’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Although primary CNS lymphoma is rare, it could happen to almost anyone. However, some people with certain risk factors have a greater chance. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. For example, having a reduced immune system increases the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause a disease (and just because you have risk factors, it doesn’t mean you'll definitely get the disease). But people with primary CNS lymphoma often have one or more of these risk factors: Having an immunodeficiency disorder, which is an illness that weakens the immune system’s ability to fight infections and diseases.
2443	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
2444	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
2445	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2446	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
2447	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
2448	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2449	It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is the focus of this book. Anything that increases your chances of developing liver cancer is called a risk factor. Screening is when tests are done on a regular basis to detect a disease in someone without symptoms. If you have cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B, then you should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program. Screening helps find disease early when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children.
2450	If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus.
2451	If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus.
2452	They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary. Less common epithelial ovarian cancers include: Low-grade serous carcinoma Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma Carcinosarcoma (also called malignant mixed Mullerian tumors) Clear cell carcinoma Mucinous carcinoma Borderline epithelial tumor (also called low malignant potential tumors) Less common non-epithelial ovarian cancers include: Malignant sex-cord stromal tumors Malignant germ cell tumors Primary peritoneal cancer Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the the tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers the abdominal organs. The treatment information in this guide also applies to primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer. How is the type determined? To diagnose ovarian cancer and determine the cancer type, tumor tissue needs to be removed from your body and tested. If surgery is planned first, the tumor and other tissues removed during surgery will be tested. If chemotherapy is planned first, a biopsy will be performed to remove a sample of the tumor. A physician expert called a pathologist determines the type of ovarian cancer by examining the cancerous tissue. The pathologist also determines the cancer grade.
2453	It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests show the primary tumor, or where the cancer started, and look for cancer in other parts of the body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting imaging tests, will write a report and send this report to your health care provider (HCP). It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests.
2454	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
2455	Common symptoms include: Headaches – Headaches are very common and often the first symptom in people with a glioma. Headaches can be worse in the morning, wake you up in the middle of the night, and occur with nausea and vomiting. Seizures – Seizures are also frequent in people with brain tumors. Seizures are often an early sign of a glioma, especially in low-grade gliomas. Fatigue – Fatigue is another common symptom of a glioma. Fatigue can be debilitating, frequent, emotionally overwhelming, and not related to how much sleep you get or how much activity you do. However, physical activity or exercise can sometimes help. Nausea and vomiting – Nausea and vomiting can be caused by the tumor putting increased pressure on the brain. Problems with thinking and speech – Examples include confusion, memory loss, and speech difficulties. Weakness or problems moving – People with a brain tumor may have muscle weakness on one side of the body, or difficulty with walking or balance. Changes in personality or mood – Changes in behavior, mood, and personality can occur in people whose tumors are located in parts of the brain that control mood and personality. Other symptoms also sometimes occur.
2456	It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate. High doses of methotrexate are needed to overcome the blood-brain barrier and still have enough strength to kill lymphoma cells. The blood-brain barrier is a protective layer around the brain that prevents germs, infections, and other toxins from getting in. But it also blocks some chemotherapy drugs like methotrexate from reaching the brain. For induction therapy, high-dose methotrexate is given together with the immunotherapy drug rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab can be given on its own but it usually works better when given with chemotherapy. In addition to methotrexate and rituximab, one or more other chemotherapy medicines such as temozolomide, vincristine, and procarbazine may also be included. Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone.
2457	Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin. Excision biopsy During an excision biopsy, all or part of the lesion is removed. This biopsy can be done in Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, and genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used.
2458	What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone.
2459	It does not use x-rays, which means there is no radiation delivered to your body during the test. Because of the very strong magnets used in the MRI machine, tell the technologist about any metal in your body. Contrast may or may not be used. A closed MRI has a capsule-like design where the magnet surrounds you. The space is small and enclosed. An open MRI has a magnetic top and bottom, which allows for an opening on each end. Closed MRIs are more common than open MRIs, so if you have claustrophobia (a dread or fear of enclosed spaces), be sure to talk to your care team about it. MRI scans take longer to perform than CT scans. PET scan A PET (positron emission tomography) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and how much sugar is being taken up by the cancer cells. This gives an idea about how fast the cancer cells are growing. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan.
2460	It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests show the primary tumor, or where the cancer started, and look for cancer in other parts of the body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting imaging tests, will write a report and send this report to your health care provider (HCP). It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests.
2461	During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended.
2462	It is performed using a hollow tool with a magnifying lens at one end, called a cystoscope. The cystoscope is inserted through the urethra and guided into the bladder. Proctoscopy is a procedure to see inside the anus and rectum. It is performed with a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and magnifying lens called a proctoscope. If abnormal or suspicious areas are seen during cystoscopy or proctoscopy, tissue samples will be removed and tested (biopsied). If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke or vape, it’s important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking and vaping can also increase the risk of lung problems during and after chemotherapy. They also increase your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your care team about resources and programs that can help you quit.
2463	Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. Our body has 206 bones. Bones provide structure and support, protect our organs, create blood cells, store chemicals the body needs, and produce hormones. Bone is light, yet strong and can regrow. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for bone cancer provides an overview of tests you might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of biomarker and tumor mutation testing.
2464	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
2465	In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue. After removing the cone-shaped sample of tissue, your doctor may use a spoon-shaped tool called a curette to scrape a sample of tissue from the cervical canal. This is called endocervical curettage. The tissue removed during a cone biopsy is examined under a microscope by a pathologist. Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers.
2466	The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. ALL is thought to arise from stem cells that make an increased amount of lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into a type of white blood cell called lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for ALL provides an overview of tests your child might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy.
2467	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
2468	Guide 1 Possible tests Medical history and physical exam (H&P) by multidisciplinary team. Medical photographs will also be taken. Complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) including liver function tests (LFTs), and alkaline phosphatase Biopsy with pathology review Determine tumor status including: • Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) hormone receptor (HR) status • HER2 status Address fertility, birth control, and sexual health concerns Genetic counseling and testing if at risk for hereditary breast cancer Imaging: • Diagnostic mammogram. Ultrasound and breast MRI, as needed • Chest CT. Contrast might be used. • CT or MRI of abdomen with or without pelvis. Contrast will be used. • Bone scan or PET-CT Physical exam During a physical exam, your health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your height and weight Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes.
2469	Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread.
2470	It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better. NCCN.org/patients/feedback 3 Mouth cancer staging How mouth cancer is staged TNM scores Mouth cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. This chapter explains mouth cancer stages. How mouth cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take.
2471	It is sometimes called advanced disease. In stage 4, cancer has spread to other parts of the body (metastasized). How breast cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade and the status of the biomarkers such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR). Prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic.
2472	See page 17 for treatment information. Next steps See Follow-up and surveillance on page 22 for next steps. Follow-up and surveillance After finishing treatment for anal cancer, you will have testing to find early signs that cancer may have returned. This is called surveillance. Surveillance for the return of anal canal cancer and perianal cancer is the same. A follow-up physical exam with digital rectal examination (DRE) and anoscopy is recommended 8 to 12 weeks after completing chemoradiation to check the results of treatment. Your doctor may also order imaging tests. Depending on the results, the cancer is assigned to 1 of the following categories: Complete remission – there are no signs of cancer in the body Persistent disease – cancer remains in the body but has not grown or spread Progressive disease – the cancer has grown or spread Complete remission If initial follow-up testing finds no signs of cancer, recommended surveillance going forward is described below. Digital rectal exams DREs are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment. Lymph node exams Inguinal lymph node exams are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 5 years after treatment.
2473	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Heart tests Heart or cardiac tests are used to see how well the heart works. These tests might be used to monitor treatment side effects or to measure your heart function before you start treatment. You might be referred to a heart specialist called a cardiologist. Electrocardiogram An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) shows electrical changes in your heart. It reveals information about your heart rate and rhythm. A prolonged corrected QT interval (or QTc) occurs when your heart muscle takes longer than normal to recharge between beats. Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures.
2474	Certain treatments can cause a prolonged QTc. If the QTc becomes too prolonged, it can cause dangerous heart rhythms. Echocardiogram An echocardiogram (or echo) uses sound waves to make pictures. It is a type of ultrasound. For this test, small patches will be placed on your chest to track your heartbeat. Next, a wand with gel on its tip will be slid across part of your bare chest. A picture of your beating heart will be seen on a screen. The pictures will be recorded for future viewing. An echocardiogram shows the structure (valves and muscle thickness) and function of your heart (or ejection fraction). Ejection fraction is the amount of blood pumped out of the left side of your heart every time it beats. If the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart is lower than normal, this indicates decreased heart function. 66 It is important to understand what you are going through. If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said.
2475	So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. Don’t fear the digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. Although it can be uncomfortable, it’s over in less than a minute. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is a procedure in which your doctor inserts a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. General health tests Health history Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2476	After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in reading imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor. This information helps your doctor plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you may have. Imaging may not be needed for early-stage prostate cancer. If your PSA, digital rectal exam, and prostate biopsy results indicate that your risk is low for the cancer to metastasize (spread beyond the prostate), then you may not need imaging tests at this time. Your team may recommend one or more of the following imaging tests to look for cancer growth: MRI scan A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. An MRI can provide a detailed view of the cancer within the prostate. It’s also used to see if cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes or to the bones in your pelvis. MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer.
2477	Early-stage prostate cancer hasn’t spread outside the prostate gland. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spread is called metastasis. Not everyone diagnosed with prostate cancer needs treatment. 66 Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation.” 2 Tests for prostate cancer About testing Common prostate tests General health tests Diagnostic tests What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed, testing is necessary to find out if you have prostate cancer and whether it’s early-stage or advanced-stage cancer. Testing also helps your providers plan the right treatment. About testing Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing.
2478	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. A PET scan appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan can determine the extent of your cancer or see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. detailed image. This combined method is called a PET/CT or PET/MRI scan. PSMA-PET PET scans use different types of tracers. The most common tracer in prostate cancer locates a protein called prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells can make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence.
2479	3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer. This chapter describes the available treatment options and what you might expect from them. Talk with your care team about which treatment could be best for you. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with many treatment options. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy as well as non-hormone therapies like chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy. Often, hormone therapy is combined with one or more other therapies. Combining therapies can be more effective than using either therapy alone. key word in ADT is “deprivation”—this therapy “deprives” (starves) the cancer of its main fuel: androgens. This can shrink the tumor or slow tumor growth for a while. You might hear the term “castration” used when describing prostate cancer or its treatment. This term describes a drastic reduction of testosterone. Castration can be done with hormone-lowering medication or by surgical removal of one or both testicles (orchiectomy). Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles.
2480	This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Testing begins with prostate cancer screening tests, followed by tests of your general health, and then diagnostic tests, if needed. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Common prostate tests Common prostate cancer tests are used to detect the possibility of prostate cancer in someone who’s undiagnosed. They’re also used to check and monitor prostate cancer in patients who have been diagnosed. Two common tests that look for prostate cancer are the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and digital rectal exam. PSA test This is a blood test that measures the amount of PSA in your bloodstream. PSA is a protein made inside the prostate gland. Its job is to help semen transport sperm. All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA.
2481	If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. But a high PSA level doesn’t automatically mean you have prostate cancer. Rather, it’s a warning sign that you may need further testing. Digital rectal exam Don’t be fooled by the name—no high-tech electronics are used in a digital rectal exam. For this test, the word “digital” means “finger.” The doctor will insert a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for any signs of cancer. The doctor will wear gloves and use a lubricant to make it easier. A digital rectal exam (also called a prostate exam) may be an awkward and unpleasant form of testing. But it’s the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during a digital rectal exam, though. So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing.
2482	Early-stage prostate cancer hasn’t spread outside the prostate gland. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spread is called metastasis. Not everyone diagnosed with prostate cancer needs treatment. 66 Be your own advocate. Talk to someone who has gone through the same thing as you. Ask a lot of questions, even the ones you are afraid to ask. You have to protect yourself and ensure you make the best decisions for you, and get the best care for your particular situation.” 2 Tests for prostate cancer About testing Common prostate tests General health tests Diagnostic tests What’s next? Key points If you haven’t yet been diagnosed, testing is necessary to find out if you have prostate cancer and whether it’s early-stage or advanced-stage cancer. Testing also helps your providers plan the right treatment. About testing Health care providers use a variety of tests to find prostate cancer and to determine how advanced the cancer is. Tests are used to plan treatment, check how well treatment is working, and monitor your health after treatment ends. This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing.
2483	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. Like an MRI and CT, a PET scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. A PET appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more detailed image. These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans.
2484	An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during a digital rectal exam, though. So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. General health history Health history and physical exam Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your team about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of your regular medications and any over-the-counter medicines, herbs, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your care team needs to know if you’re taking them. A physical exam is a check of your body for any signs of disease. Your health care provider Taking supplements? Bring a list of your medicines to your doctor’s office when you begin testing.
2485	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
2486	What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk.
2487	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
2488	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2489	Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think!
2490	These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Biomarker tumor testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. This information may be helpful when choosing the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. These tests are generally used in advanced or widely spread (metastatic) cancers. However, in comparison to other cancers, molecular testing has limited value in the treatment of mouth cancers since there are few drugs that specifically target the genetic mutations causing mouth cancers to grow and spread. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins.
2491	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
2492	Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams. First 2 years: Every 2 to 4 months Next 3 years: Every 3 to 6 months After 5 years: Once a year Your provider may order blood and imaging tests if you develop symptoms or if there are other reasons to suspect relapse. If your CA-125 level (or other tumor marker) was high originally, it may be checked on a regular basis after treatment. In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 5: Survivorship for more information. "I truly believe that you have to go through something life changing, to gain something life affirming." – Ovarian cancer survivor Recurrence The return of cancer after treatment is called a recurrence, or a relapse. Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence.
2493	This chapter will help you know what tests you may have and what to expect during testing. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Testing begins with prostate cancer screening tests, followed by tests of your general health, and then diagnostic tests, if needed. Not every person with prostate cancer will receive every test listed here. When you go for testing, bring someone with you to listen, ask questions, and write down the answers. Common prostate tests Common prostate cancer tests are used to detect the possibility of prostate cancer in someone who’s undiagnosed. They’re also used to check and monitor prostate cancer in patients who have been diagnosed. Two common tests that look for prostate cancer are the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and digital rectal exam. PSA test This is a blood test that measures the amount of PSA in your bloodstream. PSA is a protein made inside the prostate gland. Its job is to help semen transport sperm. All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA.
2494	The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer. PSA density also accounts for those with small and very small prostates, who could have prostate cancer even with low PSAs. Grade Group If cancer cells are found in your biopsy samples, further testing can identify your cancer risk. Results from these tests may indicate that the cancer will grow and spread quickly, for example. Or the results may suggest that the cancer will grow very slowly and not spread outside of the prostate at all. This information helps plan the best treatment for your type of cancer. By looking at your biopsy samples, the pathologist will identify certain cancer cell patterns (called Gleason patterns), which are used to calculate your Gleason score, which translates to your Grade Group, which estimates your risk. This can be confusing at first (Gleason patterns? Gleason score? Grade Group?) but it’s not all that complicated in the end. Read on.
2495	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan is used after you’ve been diagnosed to determine the extent of your cancer or to see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. Like an MRI and CT, a PET scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. A PET appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more detailed image. These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans.
2496	So it’s usually paired with a PSA test and other factors— your age, race, family history, and more—to determine whether you need further testing. Don’t fear the digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is the simplest and most direct way to check the size and texture of your prostate. Although it can be uncomfortable, it’s over in less than a minute. Digital rectal exam A digital rectal exam is a procedure in which your doctor inserts a finger into your rectum to feel your prostate. An irregular or hardened part of the prostate could be a sign of a tumor. Not all parts of the prostate can be felt during this exam, though. So other tests, like PSA level and imaging, are used to get a more complete picture of your prostate health. General health tests Health history Your care team needs to have all your health information. They’ll ask you about any health problems and treatments you’ve had in your life. Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2497	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. A PET scan appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan can determine the extent of your cancer or see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. detailed image. This combined method is called a PET/CT or PET/MRI scan. PSMA-PET PET scans use different types of tracers. The most common tracer in prostate cancer locates a protein called prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells can make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence.
2498	The tracer targets your cancer cells, which show up as bright spots on the scan. Afterward, the radiotracer is passed out of your body in your urine. A PET scan appointment can take 1 to 2 hours, including about 30 minutes of actual scanning time. Because PET uses a different imaging method, it’s often combined with other types of imaging, such as CT or MRI, to provide an even more PET imaging A positron emission tomography (PET) scan highlights cells in your body that may be cancerous. A PET scan can determine the extent of your cancer or see if it has metastasized. PET imaging can also show how well treatment is working. detailed image. This combined method is called a PET/CT or PET/MRI scan. PSMA-PET PET scans use different types of tracers. The most common tracer in prostate cancer locates a protein called prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells can make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence.
2499	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your care team will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy sample may be taken from the prostate, the metastasis (an area of cancer that has spread outside of the prostate), or sometimes both. Biopsy of the prostate A prostate biopsy is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an PSMA-PET scan of prostate cancer A CT scan for a patient treated for prostate cancer shows a crosssection of the body at the pelvis. The CT pinpoints a lymph node that appears normal (top image). But a PMSA-PET scan of the same lymph node highlights prostate cancer cells (arrow in bottom image). Images: University of Chicago Medicine expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised.
2500	These combined methods are called PET/CT or PET/MRI scans. PSMA/PET PSMA/PET imaging is a special kind of PET imaging that locates a protein called prostatespecific membrane antigen (PSMA) on the surface of prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells make a lot of PSMA, so doctors developed tracers that target this specific protein. PSMA/PET is especially useful for detecting cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes or has metastasized to farther areas. It’s also used to monitor prostate cancer that may return after treatment (recurrence). So, someone with early-stage prostate cancer may not need PSMA/PET imaging when first diagnosed. Your team will discuss whether a PSMA/PET scan could be helpful for your specific cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastases, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream.
2501	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
2502	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2503	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
2504	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
2505	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
2506	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
2507	The contrast makes the lining of your kidneys, ureters, and bladder easier to see. You may have a urogram if you’re feeling symptoms such as pain in your side or back, or if you have blood in your urine. Renal ultrasound shows your kidneys, ureters, and bladder in real time. It’s the same technology used to look at a baby in the womb. A renal ultrasound is a painless, non-surgical test that produces black and white images of your kidneys and other organs. Pyelogram uses x-rays and contrast solution to look for a blockage—such as a tumor, kidney stone, or blood clot—in your ureters or kidneys. This test may also be used to find causes for blood in urine. A pyelogram is usually done in the operating room during a cystoscopy. You’ll be given anesthesia for this procedure. During the cystoscopy, the contrast is given intravenously (into a vein) or injected directly into the ureters. Tips for testing Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results.
2508	It includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, and rectum. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. Stomach contractions along with enzymes and acid break down food into chyme. From the stomach, chyme enters the small intestine where nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream. Since only small amounts of chyme are released into the small The digestive system The digestive system takes in and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes organs like your liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, and intestines. Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include: Cardia – the opening where the esophagus connects to the stomach. Fundus – the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge higher than the opening of the esophagus (farthest from the pylorus). It stores undigested food and gases released from digestion. Body – the main part of the stomach. Antrum – the lower portion of the stomach where food mixes with enzymes and acid. Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion.
2509	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2510	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
2511	SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book. NCCN has a two-part book series on NSCLC, found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are the causes and risk factors? Smoking cigarettes is the main cause of SCLC. Almost everyone with SCLC smokes or has smoked. Many people with SCLC have regularly smoked more than a pack a day. Exposure to second-hand smoke also increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from combustible tobacco products. Although rare in Western countries, there are occasions where people with no smoking history develop this disease. There are other unknown causes of SCLC. Researchers are still learning why some people who smoke never get lung cancer and others who have never smoked do. A person’s chances of getting SCLC are higher in the following situations: Over 70 years of age Prior radiation therapy to the chest Exposure to cancer-causing chemicals (also known as carcinogens), such as radon and asbestos If you don’t smoke, don’t start. If you do smoke, quit. New lung tumors are less likely to develop after quitting smoking.
2512	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
2513	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
2514	This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy. It is needed lifelong in all people after total thyroidectomy. After a lobectomy, about 1 in 3 people need thyroid hormone therapy. Levothyroxine (eg, Levoxyl; Synthroid) is the most commonly used thyroid hormone replacement therapy. The goal for most people is to keep the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the low normal range. For higher risk thyroid cancers, or if there are signs of recurrence, the TSH level is kept lower than the normal range (suppressed). This helps prevent thyroid cancer cells from growing or returning. Suppression is an important part of cancer therapy for most differentiated thyroid cancers. Levothyroxine is taken as a pill once a day. It must be taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 mintutes prior to eating a meal. If not, it won't be adequately absorbed into the blood. Finding the right dose can take some trial and error. If the dose isn't optimal, common side effects include: Anxiety Trouble sleeping Racing heart (with or without an abnormal heartbeat) Sweating Blood tests are used to check the TSH level on a regular basis during thyroid replacement therapy.
2515	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
2516	Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation. For more information on fertility and family planning, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Ovarian tissue banking This method involves removing part or all of an ovary and freezing the part that contains the eggs. The frozen tissue that contains the eggs can later be unfrozen and put back in the body. Ovarian transposition Rectal cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Key points All rectal tumors should be tested for mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) or high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For cancers with this biomarker, testing for an inherited cancer syndrome called Lynch syndrome is recommended. Cancers that don't have this biomarker are called mismatch repair proficient (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS).
2517	You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still. You may get fitted for a prop to help you stay still during the radiation sessions. Pictures of the cancer site(s) will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the CT images and sophisticated computer software, your radiation oncologist will make a treatment plan. The plan will specify the radiation dose(s) and the number of sessions you will need. There will be several days between the time of simulation and the beginning of your treatment sessions. This allows sufficient time for careful treatment planning, dose calculation, and quality assurance. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks (tattoos) on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. The technician will be operating the machine from an adjacent room. You will be able to see, hear, and speak with them at all times. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes.
2518	Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. It makes hormones that help regulate metabolism and other body functions. Thyroid cancers start as small, often round areas of abnormal growth called nodules. Most don’t cause symptoms and are benign. Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. The most well-known risk factors are radiation exposure and a family history of thyroid cancer. 2 Testing 9 TSH test 9 Ultrasound 10 Biopsy 11 Key points If a thyroid nodule is found or suspected, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) blood test and an ultrasound of the thyroid and neck are needed. Your doctor uses the results to decide whether a biopsy is needed. TSH test Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone made by the pituitary gland, located near the base of the brain. TSH controls the hormones made by the thyroid. A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous.
2519	They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein). Pathologists are doctors who are trained to study tissue and cells removed during a biopsy under a microscope to determine the stage of a cancerous tumor. Plastic surgeons are doctors who can remove cancer as well as reconstruct, restore, and repair body parts. They may work with a pathologist at the time of your surgery for more immediate results. They are trained to close a wound after surgery, especially if it involves deeper tissue where general anesthesia may be needed. Head and neck surgeons are doctors who are trained to treat conditions (cancerous and noncancerous) of the deeper parts of the head and neck, including the ears, nose, and throat. Radiation oncologists are doctors who are trained to use different types of radiation therapy. Pharmacists are medical professionals who are trained to prepare and give out medicine and explain their proper use and any side effects. Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes.
2520	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
2521	A tandem and ovoid applicator uses hollow, rounded capsules instead of a ring. General anesthesia or deep sedation is often required, especially for the first applicator placement. The applicator is placed to align with the tissue targeted for treatment. Often, an imaging technique (MRI or CT) is used to guide placement of the applicator. These images are used to design the brachytherapy treatment plan. The applicator is connected to a brachytherapy machine. A radiation source travels from the machine through the hollow tubes and into the applicator. Treatment takes about 10 minutes. Sometimes brachytherapy is given as treatments over a couple days. In this case, the instruments are placed and left in the body until all the treatments have been given (1 to 2 days). You will need to remain in bed until treatment is complete so that the instruments don’t move. Brachytherapy is typically started in the final week or right after completing EBRT. Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks.
2522	Your quality of life should be the main priority that guides your treatment and care. Successful treatment isn’t just about reducing the cancer. Other goals include minimizing cognitive problems, reducing pain, lowering anxiety and stress, carrying out regular activities, being with friends and family, and enjoying life as best as you can. Your multidisciplinary team When all of your doctors, specialists, and allied health providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. Be clear about your treatment goals when you talk with your multidisciplinary team. Key points h A recommended treatment option for primary CNS lymphoma is participating in a clinical trial. Other treatment options include corticosteroids, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and stem cell rescue. Often, some of these therapies are combined to treat primary CNS lymphoma. Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that damages and destroys rapidly dividing cells throughout the body. The main chemotherapy drug used to treat primary CNS lymphoma is methotrexate. Whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) is the most commonly used radiation technique for primary CNS lymphoma. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to slow their growth and spread.
2523	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
2524	Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the pictures and sophisticated computer software, the radiation team will plan the best radiation dose and number of treatments. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. Your radiation oncologist will devise a treatment plan to aim radiation beams at the anal tumor and lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin. You will be alone in the treatment room. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room. The technician will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. As treatment is given, you may hear noises. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Common side effects at the treatment site during the 5 to 6 weeks of radiation treatment include skin irritation, tenderness, redness, and sores or skin breakdown. Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist.
2525	Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship. Anal cancer survivors may experience both short- and long-term health effects of cancer and its treatment. These effects are different for everyone and depend on the treatment(s) received. Your primary care doctor After finishing cancer treatment, your primary care doctor, also known as a general practitioner (GP) or primary care physician (PCP), will play an important role in your care. Your oncologist (cancer doctor) and PCP should work together to make sure you get the follow-up care you need. Your oncologist will develop a written survivorship care plan that includes: A summary of your cancer treatment history, including surgeries, radiation treatments, and chemotherapy A description of possible short-term, late, and long-term side effects Recommendations for monitoring for the return of cancer Information on when your care will be transferred to your PCP Your primary care doctor Clear roles and responsibilities for both your cancer care team and your PCP Recommendations on your overall health and well-being Late and long-term side effects Some side effects of anal cancer treatment can linger longer than expected.
2526	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
2527	It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen. You’ll need to stay in the hospital for at least several days. It may take 2 to 3 months or longer for you to recover. Common side effects and complications of a radical cystectomy include constipation, diarrhea, bleeding, bowel problems, infections, and changes in sexual function. Talk to your Cystectomy Cystectomy is surgery to remove the bladder. A radical cystectomy removes the entire bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs. It’s the most common surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. A partial cystectomy removes part of the bladder. It’s rarely used for bladder cancer. urologist and treatment team about the risks, benefits, and side effects of a radical cystectomy. Because a radical cystectomy removes your entire bladder, you’ll need a new way for urine to exit your body. So another procedure, called a urinary diversion, is also done at the same time. To find out about the 3 types of urinary diversion, see the next page. Partial cystectomy A partial cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove part of the bladder. It’s not widely used for the treatment of bladder cancer.
2528	Stage 1A2 and 1B1 Extrafascial hysterectomy with lymph node evaluation is recommended for low-risk stage 1B1 and 1A2 cancers. These cancers must meet the following criteria for extrafascial hysterectomy to be considered: No LVSI No cancer found in cone biopsy margins The tumor is any grade squamous cell carcinoma or a low-grade adenocarcinoma The tumor is 2 cm or smaller and not very deep h No signs of cancer spread in the body For 1A2 and 1B1 cancers that do not meet the above criteria, radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B2 and 2A1 Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node evaluation is recommended for these stages. Lymph nodes in the abdomen (para-aortic nodes) may be removed in addition to pelvic lymph nodes. Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 1B3 cancers are larger than 4 cm (about the size of a walnut) but do not extend beyond the cervix. Stage 2A2 cancers are also larger than 4 cm and extend into the upper vagina. These cancers may be treated as earlystage (with surgery) or as locally advanced (with chemoradiation and brachytherapy).
2529	Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed. If the results suggest that the cancer was not completely removed, you may have another cone biopsy. Or, your doctor may recommend radical trachelectomy. For stage 1A1 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation should also be performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1A2 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1A2 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 centimeters, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is performed in addition to the cone biopsy. For stage 1A2 cancers with LVSI, treatment with either cone biopsy or radical trachelectomy is recommended. Pelvic lymph node evaluation is also performed. If trachelectomy is planned, see the next page for information on treatment after surgery. Stage 1B1 Cone biopsy is an option for some very-lowrisk stage 1B1 cancers. The tumor must be smaller than 2 cm, there must be no LVSI, and other criteria must be met.
2530	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
2531	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
2532	FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. FES PET-CT FES is a radioactive form of the hormone estrogen. It might be used instead of FDG PET-CT when cancer is estrogen receptorpositive . Inflammatory breast cancer can be difficult to diagnose. Ask for a referral to a breast specialist, if possible. Ultrasound An ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your bare breast using gel. It may also be placed below your armpit. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, a breast ultrasound or MRI is used to guide a biopsy. Biopsy A biopsy is a procedure that removes a sample of tissue or fluid. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment.
2533	You may hear buzzing or clicking during the scan. MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body. MRI is especially good at making clear pictures of CT scans A CT scan of the chest and abdomen with contrast is recommended to look for areas of cancer beyond the pelvis, such as the liver or lungs. Either CT or MRI is used to learn the extent of anal cancer in the pelvis. areas of soft tissue. Unlike a CT scan, MRI does not use radiation. Tell your doctor know if you have issues with small enclosed spaces. CT or MRI may be combined with positron emission tomography (PET). PET involves first injecting radioactive glucose (sugar) into the body. The radioactive sugar is detected with a special camera during the scan. Cancer cells appear brighter than normal cells because they use sugar more quickly. HIV testing People with HIV are at increased risk of developing anal cancer. It is important to know your HIV status. If you have not been tested for HIV, your provider may recommend that you get tested.
2534	Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care. Key points Although most nodules aren't cancerous, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test and ultrasound are recommended if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. Your provider uses the ultrasound results to determine whether a needle biopsy is needed. Biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines whether the nodule is cancerous and, if so, the cancer type. 3 Treatments 13 15 16 18 19 21 Surgery Radioactive iodine Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points Surgery is the most common treatment for most thyroid cancers. However, active surveillance may be an option for some very-low-risk cancers. This involves closely monitoring the cancer instead of performing surgery right away. Surgery Surgery is the most effective treatment for thyroid cancer. Surgery may involve removing the entire thyroid gland, or just the half that contains cancer. Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed.
2535	Radioactive iodine therapy If all or most of the cancer was removed during total thyroidectomy, RAI therapy may be an option to kill thyroid cancer cells left in the body. Your provider will consider the following factors to help decide if RAI may be helpful: The size of the tumor The tumor subtype Whether the cancer invaded lymph or blood vessels Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes The thyroglobulin (Tg) level after surgery Age at diagnosis RAI therapy is usually recommended if any of the following is true: The cancer had spread significantly beyond the thyroid The cancer had invaded blood vessels (applies to follicular and oncocytic tumors) The Tg level was high 6 to 12 weeks after surgery There were large, or more than 5, lymph nodes with cancer The tumor is a differentiated high-grade carcinoma Monitoring and follow-up care Follow-up testing and surveillance are somewhat different after lobectomy versus after total thyroidectomy. After total thyroidectomy Short-term follow-up after total thyroidectomy involves a physical exam and blood tests. A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page.
2536	A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous. A high TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are low. A low TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are high. This is called hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid. Your provider may order a radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake test. Ultrasound Ultrasound is the most common imaging technique used to look for thyroid cancer. It uses sound waves to form images showing the size, shape, and location of a thyroid nodule. An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is brief and painless. It is usually done lying down. A Ultrasound An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is one of the first tests ordered if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. hand-held device called an ultrasound probe is used. After a gel is applied to the skin, the probe is moved back and forth over the thyroid area. If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer.
2537	Brachytherapy involves treatment with radioactive material placed inside the body. It delivers a high dose of radiation directly to the tumor. Systemic therapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are most often used for recurrent and/or metastatic cervical cancer with specific biomarkers. Chemoradiation EBRT and platinum-based chemotherapy given concurrently (during the same time period) is a treatment strategy called chemoradiation. Clinical trials Clinical trials give people access to investigational treatments that may, in time, be approved by the FDA. 4 Treatment for common types Fertility-sparing treatment Early-stage cancer Locally advanced cancer Surveillance Recurrence Metastatic cancer Key points This chapter presents recommended treatment options for the most common types of cervical cancer. Surgery is usually recommended for earlystage cancers, while most locally advanced cancers are treated with chemoradiation. This section applies to the following types of cervical cancer: Squamous cell carcinoma Adenocarcinoma Adenosquamous carcinoma Treatment is based on the cancer stage. The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI).
2538	Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive sugar-based substance called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer.
2539	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2540	Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger.
2541	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
2542	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
2543	A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL. Diagnostic CT Computed tomography, or CT, is like an x-ray but it shows body tissue more clearly. A diagnostic CT uses more radiation than regular CT and adds a contrast agent. Some people refer to this as a CAT scan. A contrast agent is a chemical that highlights body tissues for the scanner. It’s given to you through a needle placed into a vein in your arm. Some people can’t have contrast due to certain health issues, like allergies or chronic kidney disease. Ask if contrast is safe for you. A diagnostic CT of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis may be needed for 2 reasons: To look for big lymph nodes that may be causing symptoms To assess the extent of the cancer before starting treatment Since a CT scan is often not needed, you should ask your doctor what the reason is to obtain the test. A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel.
2544	Lymph vessels and nodes are found everywhere in the body. Some patients have advanced-stage prostate cancer when they’re first diagnosed. Others develop advanced-stage cancer after having treatment for early-stage cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Advanced-stage prostate cancer is usually a life-long disease. But treatment can slow down its growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. Treatments for advancedstage prostate cancer include hormone therapy, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, radiopharmaceuticals, surgery, and other therapies. It’s true that prostate cancer in the advanced stage can be fatal for some patients. But in the past few years, improved detection methods and better treatments have been reducing the number of deaths from prostate cancer in patients of all races and ethnicities. Many people with advanced-stage prostate cancer continue to live with the cancer and, in the end, may die from something else. Scientists have learned a great deal about prostate cancer in recent years. As a result, today’s detection methods and treatments work better than those in the past. Also, many patients with prostate cancer have more treatment choices now than they had before. What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you.
2545	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
2546	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
2547	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
2548	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
2549	A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell. Hormones recognize and bind to specific hormone receptors. When hormones attach to receptors on breast cancer cells, they can cause cancer to grow. If found, these receptors may be targeted using endocrine therapy. There are 2 types of hormone receptors: Estrogen – plays a role in breast development Progesterone – plays a role in menstrual cycle and pregnancy Hormone receptor (HR) testing should be done on any new tumors. A biopsy sample will be used. Hormone receptor-positive In hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, IHC finds estrogen and/or progesterone hormone receptors. Most breast cancers are . Estrogen receptor (ER) is stimulated by estrogen and provides survival and proliferation (rapid growth) signals. Cancer cells deprived of estrogen or which have their ER signal blocked with treatment may stop growing or die. Progesterone receptor (PR) binds progesterone and also provides survival and proliferation signals. It is thought that PR expression also suggests the tumor is estrogen dependent. breast cancer is treated with endocrine therapy, which blocks estrogen receptor signaling.
2550	It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence.
2551	Most are capsules that you swallow. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy doesn't work well against most thyroid cancers. It may be used for cancer that isn't responding to other treatment, or that has spread to distant areas of the body. It is most often used in combination with radiation therapy for anaplastic thyroid cancer—the least common and most aggressive type. Most chemotherapy medicines are put directly into the bloodstream through a vein. Systemic therapy side effects Side effects of systemic therapy can include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Constipation Hair loss Mouth sores Loss of appetite Low blood cell counts (white cells, red cells, and platelets) Side effects seen more often with targeted therapy include body aches, rash, high blood pressure, and abnormal bleeding. Some targeted therapies have serious side effects that can affect your heart, skin, and digestive system. If systemic therapy is planned, ask your care team for a complete list of potential side effects. Most side effects only occur during cancer treatment. But, some can start years later. For example, long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and not being able to have children.
2552	Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins. This helps your immune system locate and then destroy the cancer cells. Rituximab is given through an IV infusion. Side effects of immunotherapy Rituximab and other immunotherapies may cause drowsiness, fatigue, constipation, joint pain, loss of appetite, low blood cell counts, serious blood clots, and rashes. Keep track of your symptoms and side effects Think about ways to keep track of your symptoms and side effects when they happen. You can make notes in a weekly diary, on a calendar, or in a smartphone app. Or create your own way to record the symptoms or side effects you experience. Some things to track include: Each treatment and any side effects it caused How long the side effect lasted How the side effect affected your quality of life If you’re given a treatment for a side effect, note how well the treatment worked Show this information to your treatment team at each visit. Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing.
2553	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
2554	Systemic therapy may be given in addition to radiation. If systemic therapy is planned, platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may damage critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. If you are eligible, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a recommended treatment option. Enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy is also an option.  See Part 5: When treatment is over for information on monitoring and follow-up care. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is known as “local”. Local CSCC is most often treated with surgery. Key features of the cancer will be considered to determine if it is a low-, high- or very high-risk CSCC. This is called a risk assessment. The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under the microscope, it is a high-risk or very highrisk cancer. The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
2555	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
2556	Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too.
2557	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
2558	IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram. Since there is swelling (edema) and redness (erythema) of the breast, IBC can look like an infection and therefore be difficult to diagnose. Often, a biopsy of the affected skin is done to diagnose the tumor. Test results You will have blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to stage the cancer. The biopsy sample will be tested for hormone receptors (estrogen and progesterone) and HER2 receptors. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
2559	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
2560	Get to know your care team and help them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, the care team might include the following: h A diagnostic radiologist interprets the results of mammograms, ultrasounds, and other imaging tests. An interventional radiologist performs needle biopsies and places intravenous (IV) ports for treatment. A pathologist analyzes the cells and tissues removed during a biopsy and provides cancer diagnosis, staging, and information about biomarker testing. A surgical oncologist performs operations to remove cancer. h A reconstructive (plastic) surgeon performs breast reconstruction, if desired, for those who undergo mastectomy. A medical oncologist treats cancer in adults using systemic therapy. h A radiation oncologist prescribes and delivers radiation therapy to treat cancer. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you do not feel pain during surgery or procedures. Residents and fellows are doctors who are continuing their training, some to become specialists in a certain field of medicine. Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant.
2561	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2562	You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver. This may be the case if you can't have the contrast agent used for a CT scan. MRI An MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. A gel may be inserted into the rectum before MRI imaging. A light coil device or blanket will be placed on top of you. It sends and receives radio waves to record the images. The device covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. You may feel a bit warm during the scan. Endorectal ultrasound While a pelvic MRI is preferred for imaging rectal cancer, an endorectal ultrasound (EUS) is sometimes performed instead. Using sound waves, this test can also show the extent of cancer in the pelvis. A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen.
2563	Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency. Have all phone numbers in one place (even if it’s on your phone)." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for colorectal cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic rectal cancer cells that may remain in the body after treatment. This may become helpful for predicting whether the cancer is likely to return. But, at this time, ctDNA testing is still being studied in clinical trials. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. This information helps your care team stage the cancer and plan treatment. A radiologist will interpret and convey the imaging results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for these tests. You may need to stop taking some medicines and stop eating and drinking for a few hours beforehand. Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink.
2564	Removing polyps can prevent cancer before it starts. Most can be removed during a colonoscopy using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Polyps can also be tested to make sure that cancer hasn't already started to form. For more information on finding polyps early, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Colorectal Cancer Screening at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. The rectum is the last part of the large bowel. Stool is held in the rectum until it leaves the body through the anus. Polyps are non-cancerous growths that form on the inner lining of the colon and rectum. Most rectal cancers start in polyps called adenomas. These cancers are called adenocarcinomas. 2 Testing and treatment planning Mismatch repair testing Family health history Blood tests Imaging Fertility and family planning Key points This chapter discusses testing and other steps needed to create your treatment plan. Mismatch repair testing Everyone diagnosed with rectal cancer should have their tumor tested for mutations (changes) in genes that fix damaged DNA, called mismatch repair (MMR) genes. This feature of some rectal cancers is a type of biomarker.
2565	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
2566	But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options. Endoscopic submucosal dissection If testing finds that the tumor hasn’t grown beyond the second (muscle) layer of the rectal wall, it is a T1 tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a recommended option for all T1 tumors. This minimally invasive procedure removes small rectal cancers in one piece, often curing them. Another name for this procedure is endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). First, an endoscope is used to locate the tumor in the rectal wall. A tool is guided through the scope to inject fluid between the tumor and the layer of muscle beneath it. This helps lift and separate the tumor, making it easier to cut off. Most people don’t need more treatment. Surveillance after ESD Checking for recurrence is recommended for at least 5 years after ESD. During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD.
2567	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
2568	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
2569	APR is a fairly radical surgery that requires cutting into the abdomen and into the area between the anus and genitals (the perineum) to reach and remove the cancer. This type of surgery is also used for some rectal cancers. In addition to the anus, APR typically involves removing the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and the fatty tissue surrounding the rectum. Lymph nodes in the groin will also be removed during surgery if any are known to have cancer. This is known as a groin dissection. Radiation treatment for anal cancer weakens and damages the perineum, which can interfere with healing after APR. In some cases, closing the wound requires taking tissue from another area of the body. This is known as muscle flap reconstruction. It can improve healing of the perineum and reduce complications after surgery. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominis, along with skin, fat, and blood vessels, is often used for reconstruction. If APR is planned, ask your doctor about muscle flap reconstruction. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR may be needed for anal cancer that does not respond to initial treatment or that returns after treatment.
2570	Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis. The goal is to cure the cancer by removing all of the organs to which cancer has or may spread. All remaining organs of the female reproductive system are removed during pelvic exenteration. This includes the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and vagina. Nearby organs in the pelvis including the bladder, rectum, and/or anus may also be removed. If the bladder and/or organs involved in bowel function are removed, a diversion is typically performed. Diversions are surgical procedures that divert (redirect) urine and/or stool to new openings through which they exit the body. Vaginal reconstruction It is often possible to reconstruct the vagina after pelvic exenteration. A surgeon can create an artificial vagina using muscle from another area of your body. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominus is often used for vaginal reconstruction. This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion.
2571	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
2572	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
2573	If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy. A PARP inhibitor may also be an option for maintenance therapy, if you haven’t already been treated with one and there is a BRCA mutation. After successful chemotherapy for recurrent cancer, maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor can be continued until the cancer grows or spreads, or until the side effects make it intolerable or unsafe to continue. When used after recurrence treatment, the safety of maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor for longer than 2 years is unknown. Hypersensitivity reactions With repeat use of carboplatin and/or cisplatin, you are at increased risk of a hypersensitivity (allergic) reaction. This can be life-threatening. If your treatment team hasn’t brought it up, below are some questions you can ask to learn about this risk. How likely is it that I will have an allergic reaction to chemotherapy? How will I know if I’m having an allergic reaction? What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction?
2574	Some anal cancers take longer to respond to treatment than others. It may be safe to monitor the cancer for as long as 6 months after treatment to see if there is improvement. Waiting to see if the cancer improves may avoid the need for surgery to remove the anus. If the cancer does not go into complete remission or gets worse, see “Progressive disease” below. If the cancer goes into remission, surveillance as described above under “Complete remission” is started. Progressive disease If the follow-up examination 8 to 12 weeks after treatment finds that the cancer has progressed, a biopsy will be performed to be certain. If biopsy results confirm progression, the next step is imaging. Imaging can show if the cancer is limited to the anal area (locally progressive) or whether it has spread to areas far from the pelvis (metastatic disease). See page 26 for information on the treatment of metastatic anal cancer. Treatment for locally progressive anal cancer is similar to recurrent non-metastatic anal cancer. Surgery to remove the anus is recommended. See Recurrence on the next page for more information. Before proceeding with surgery, your doctor may recommend trying immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor.
2575	Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs. The following tumors are considered high risk because of their location and/or size: Tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs that are between 2 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a nickel) and 4 cm (about the size of a quarter) Any size tumor on the head, face, neck, hands, feet, shins, or sex organs The following tumors are considered very high risk because of their size: h Any tumor over 4 cm in any location Get to know your care team Keep the names and contact information for each member of your care team on hand, so you know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Tumor shape If the clinical extent (border) of the tumor is well-defined, it is considered low risk. If the border isn’t well-defined and has an uneven shape, it is considered high risk. Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected.
2576	Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. For weeks my bra had been feeling uncomfortably tight. I tried to ignore it but then felt sharp, shooting pains and the skin looked 'funny.' It took multiple office visits and finally to a surgeon to learn I had inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). a nurse and didn't know you could have breast cancer without a lump." 2 Testing for IBC 20 21 21 23 24 25 Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Distress screening Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram.
2577	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
2578	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2579	Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
2580	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
2581	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
2582	What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it. Although no one knows exactly what causes a lymphoma, we do know that lymphomas often start with a genetic abnormality (mutation) in certain lymphocytes. This abnormality causes these lymphocytes to grow out of control (become cancerous). The abnormality occurs on its own. It’s not a mutation that occurs in other cells or organs in your body. And it’s not typically passed down in families (hereditary mutation). Although primary CNS lymphoma is rare, it could happen to almost anyone. However, some people with certain risk factors have a greater chance. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases your chance of developing a disease. For example, having a reduced immune system increases the risk of developing primary CNS lymphoma. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause a disease (and just because you have risk factors, it doesn’t mean you'll definitely get the disease). But people with primary CNS lymphoma often have one or more of these risk factors: Having an immunodeficiency disorder, which is an illness that weakens the immune system’s ability to fight infections and diseases.
2583	If the cancer cannot be controlled or cured, a care plan for the end of life can be made. There are many benefits to advance care planning, including: Knowing what to expect Making the most of your time Lowering the stress of caregivers Having your wishes followed Having a better quality of life Mediastinal gray zone lymphomas 69 Overview 70 Treatment 71 Key points 71 Questions to ask Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) has overlapping features of primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Treatment is usually chemotherapy. Together, you and your care team will choose a treatment plan that is best for you. Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (MGZL) is different than primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). Those with gray zone lymphomas are best managed in cancer centers with experience in treating this type of lymphoma. Overview Gray zone lymphomas have overlapping features of non-Hodgkin primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). This means that the cells are large but can vary in size and might look similar to Hodgkin cells (Reed-Sternberg cells). Reed-Sternberg cells are large, abnormal lymphocytes that may contain more than one nucleus.
2584	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
2585	Other symptoms also sometimes occur. Gliomas can cause vision problems such as blurred vision, double vision, or loss of peripheral (side) vision. Sensory disturbances include numbness, tingling, or burning sensations often on one side of the body. And high-grade gliomas are linked to blood clots in the legs and the lungs, which can cause leg swelling, chest pain, and shortness of breath. If you have any of these symptoms, your provider may want to take a closer look. This is where imaging comes in, which is discussed on the next page. Areas of the brain and their functions PARIETAL LOBE intelligence language reading sensation sensory perception OCCIPITAL LOBE vision color perception Neurological exam A neurological exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, thinking, balance, coordination, reflexes, strength, hearing, and senses of touch and smell. You may also have an eye exam to check the health of the nerves in the back of your eyes. Performance status Your team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like working, taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status.
2586	Tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). A golf ball is 4 cm and a pea is 1 cm . Depth of invasion (DOI) is a measure of how deep the tumor has grown into the layers of tissue, not tumor thickness. Imaging scans such as an MRI can be used to calculate DOI. As depth of invasion increases, the risk of regional lymph node metastases also increases. Tis – This is carcinoma in situ, meaning that cancerous cells are found only in the squamous cell layer. T1 – Tumor is 2 cm or less with DOI of 5 mm or less. T2 – Tumor is 2 cm or less with DOI of more than 5 mm or tumor is between 2 cm and 4 cm with DOI of or less. T3 – Tumor is between 2 cm and 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor is larger than 4 cm with DOI of or less. T4a – Moderately advanced local disease.
2587	Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer. (It’s also called locally advanced prostate cancer. This book will call it regional prostate cancer to avoid confusion between localized and locally advanced.) Cancer that spreads outside the prostate to other parts of the body is called metastatic prostate cancer. Early vs. advanced prostate cancer Early-stage prostate cancer has not visibly spread beyond the prostate gland. It usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. This is also called localized prostate cancer. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has grown outside the prostate and may have spread to other areas in the body such as lymph nodes (bottom left), bones, or organs like the liver or lungs (bottom right). This is also called metastatic prostate cancer. Can prostate cancer be cured? Early-stage prostate cancer is highly treatable and often curable. The earlier that prostate cancer is diagnosed and treated, the more likely that a patient will live without cancer. Most people with early-stage disease live without cancer for many years, usually the rest of their lives.
2588	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
2589	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2590	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
2591	Hormone therapies for prostate cancer include luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists and LHRH antagonists, both of which cause the testicles to stop making testosterone. You may have heard of leuprolide (Lupron), a commonly used LHRH agonist or degarelix (Firmagon), a commonly used LHRH antagonist. Most LHRH agonists and LHRH antagonists are injections. These may be given monthly, or 2, 3, or 4 times a year. The exception is relugolix (Orgovyx), an LHRH antagonist that comes as a tablet taken once a day. Anti-androgens, corticosteroids, and androgen synthesis inhibitors are also available as pills and taken 1 to 3 times a day, depending on the medication. See Guide Newer hormone therapies Hormone therapy has been the main treatment for advanced prostate cancer for several decades. Longstanding hormone therapies (such as bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide) are sometimes still used for treating prostate cancer. Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer How breast cancer spreads Key points Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands into the breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest.
2592	Treatment may be able to put primary CNS lymphoma into remission. Remission means there are no symptoms or signs of cancer. Remission may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, primary CNS lymphoma often comes back (relapses) in the brain, spinal cord, or the eye. It’s true that primary CNS lymphoma is fatal for some patients. Anyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma has a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. In the past few years, improved detection methods have shortened the time to diagnosis and led to better outcomes, even in people with weakened immune systems. Therapies specifically designed to treat primary CNS lymphoma are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease. What’s next? This chapter provides only a brief overview of primary CNS lymphoma. The next chapters explain: Tests needed to diagnose the disease Different treatment options and what they do Which treatment options are right for you What happens after treatment Thoughts on next steps 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different.
2593	New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing. Once ossification is complete, bone is continuously being replaced by a process called remodeling. Remodeling breaks down and rebuilds bone and helps maintain normal calcium levels in the body. When calcium is needed, cells called osteoclasts break down bone. This releases calcium into the bloodstream. At the same time, bone-forming cells called osteoblasts create bone from calcium in the bloodstream. Some types of bone cancer can interrupt this process. Parts of bone: Epiphysis – the end of the bone, which is covered with cartilage to make a joint. Metaphysis – located between the physis (growth plate) and diaphysis. Diaphysis – the middle region of the bone. Physis – the growth plate, which is made of cartilage. After skeletal maturity, this leaves a physeal scar or line visible in the bone. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage most bone cancers. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth.
2594	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
2595	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
2596	Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have. Treatment Surgery is recommended to treat squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Surgery for regional CSCC involves excision (removal) of the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Although surgery is preferred, it may not be an option for one or more reasons. In this case, see If surgery is not an option below for information. If surgery is very risky or might not completely remove your cancer, your doctor may suggest immunotherapy with cemiplimab-rwlc (Libtayo) first. It may shrink the tumor and make surgery less risky. Head and neck tumors Lymph nodes may be removed from one or both sides of the neck during surgery for head and neck tumors. The extent of surgery depends on the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. After surgery, radiation therapy is often given to decrease the chance of the tumor returning. Systemic therapy is sometimes used in addition to radiation therapy after surgery.
2597	A colectomy can be done in two ways. The open method removes tumor tissue through a Colectomy Surgery for colon cancer is called colectomy. It involves removing the cancerous part of the colon. The two healthy ends of the remaining colon are then attached to each other. large cut in your abdomen. The minimally invasive method involves making a few small cuts. Tools are inserted through the cuts to see and remove part of your colon. The tissue removed during surgery is sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines how far the cancer has grown within the colon wall. They also test the removed lymph nodes for cancer. These results are used to assign the cancer a stage. The stage helps determine whether you need chemotherapy after surgery. At the time of colectomy, some people may also have a procedure called a colostomy. This is done in cases where it may not be safe to reconnect the remaining sections of colon. In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma.
2598	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
2599	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
2600	But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum. These tumors may have grown into the anus or nearby pelvic floor muscle (levator ani). Abdominoperineal resection (APR) typically involves removing the anus, the rectum, the area where the rectum and colon meet, and other tissue. In some cases, the levator muscles are also removed. The outer ring of muscle in the anus may be spared. A permanent colostomy is always needed. Abdominoperineal resection (APR) APR is used for tumors in the lower rectum that may have grown into the anus or nearby muscle. It involves removing the rectum and anus and creating a permanent colostomy for stool to leave the body. After transabdominal surgery The tissue and lymph nodes removed during surgery are sent to a lab for testing. A pathologist assesses how far the cancer has grown within the rectal wall and whether any removed lymph nodes have cancer. Using this information, they assign the cancer a stage of I (1), II (2), or III (3). This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed.
2601	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
2602	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
2603	Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter. The ureter carries urine to the bladder. The bladder holds urine until it is released from the body when you urinate (or pee). A shorter tube, called the urethra, takes urine from the bladder to outside the body. Most people have two kidneys. However, each kidney works on its own and does not need the other to function. This means that the body can often work well with less than one complete kidney. Many people live full, healthy lives with only one kidney. Kidney cancer Kidney cancer starts in the tissues of the kidneys. Almost all kidney cancers are carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. In the kidneys, carcinomas most often start in the cells that line the renal tubules. This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys.
2604	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
2605	By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney. Blood then flows through tiny filtering tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Blood is cleaned as it flows through the renal tubules. The renal tubules remove waste and other substances from the blood. These substances are made into urine. The clean, filtered blood flows out of the kidney through the renal vein. The renal vein merges with a larger vein called the vena cava. The vena cava takes clean blood back up to the heart. Urine flows out of the renal tubules and collects in a hollow space in the middle of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine leaves the renal pelvis through a long tube called the The kidneys filter blood to remove waste Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery. Renal tubules remove excess water and other waste from the blood to make urine. Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter.
2606	This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys. Because it is the most common type, RCC is often simply referred to as kidney cancer. RCC is the focus of this book. There are other, less common cancers that can arise in the kidney. While they can sometimes be confused with RCC, it is important to note that they are treated differently. Urothelial carcinoma starts in the cells that line the renal pelvis and ureter that drain the kidney. While these tumors can be found up the ureter near the kidneys, they are not kidney tumors. These tumors share many features with bladder cancer. These tumors used to be called transitional call cancer. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Bladder Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) usually occurs in young children. In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney.
2607	By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney. Blood then flows through tiny filtering tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Blood is cleaned as it flows through the renal tubules. The renal tubules remove waste and other substances from the blood. These substances are made into urine. The clean, filtered blood flows out of the kidney through the renal vein. The renal vein merges with a larger vein called the vena cava. The vena cava takes clean blood back up to the heart. Urine flows out of the renal tubules and collects in a hollow space in the middle of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine leaves the renal pelvis through a long tube called the The kidneys filter blood to remove waste Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery. Renal tubules remove excess water and other waste from the blood to make urine. Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter.
2608	The contrast makes the lining of your kidneys, ureters, and bladder easier to see. You may have a urogram if you’re feeling symptoms such as pain in your side or back, or if you have blood in your urine. Renal ultrasound shows your kidneys, ureters, and bladder in real time. It’s the same technology used to look at a baby in the womb. A renal ultrasound is a painless, non-surgical test that produces black and white images of your kidneys and other organs. Pyelogram uses x-rays and contrast solution to look for a blockage—such as a tumor, kidney stone, or blood clot—in your ureters or kidneys. This test may also be used to find causes for blood in urine. A pyelogram is usually done in the operating room during a cystoscopy. You’ll be given anesthesia for this procedure. During the cystoscopy, the contrast is given intravenously (into a vein) or injected directly into the ureters. Tips for testing Results from blood tests, imaging studies, and biopsies will be used to determine your treatment plan. It’s important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results.
2609	By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney. Blood then flows through tiny filtering tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Blood is cleaned as it flows through the renal tubules. The renal tubules remove waste and other substances from the blood. These substances are made into urine. The clean, filtered blood flows out of the kidney through the renal vein. The renal vein merges with a larger vein called the vena cava. The vena cava takes clean blood back up to the heart. Urine flows out of the renal tubules and collects in a hollow space in the middle of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine leaves the renal pelvis through a long tube called the The kidneys filter blood to remove waste Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery. Renal tubules remove excess water and other waste from the blood to make urine. Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter.
2610	Fertility and pregnancy If you want the option of becoming pregnant in the future, talk to your care team about fertility-sparing treatment. It is typically only an option for small, early-stage cancers. Recommendations for fertility-sparing treatment are provided in Part 4: Treatment for common types. If fertility preservation is desired, talk to your doctor about seeing a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. Although natural pregnancy will not be possible, options to discuss may include ovarian transposition, egg or embryo freezing, and consideration of possible surrogate pregnancy in the future. Ovarian transposition Cervical cancer treatment may involve external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation damages the ovaries and causes them to stop producing hormones needed for natural pregnancy. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the radiation beam. The medical name for this procedure is oophoropexy. Ovarian transposition before starting EBRT may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Egg freezing Unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte preservation.
2611	Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye. While both blue light cystoscopy and narrow-band imaging may potentially detect tumors better than standard white light, they’re relatively new and still in the “testing phase.” More research will show whether they can replace or be used with white light as the standard detection method. Types of imaging include x-rays, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound. CT scan A CT scan takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. A computer combines all the x-ray pictures to make a series of cross-sectional images. To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have a CT scan of your abdomen and pelvis. The pelvis is the area of the lower abdomen located between the hip bones; it contains reproductive organs as well as the bladder and rectum. A CT scanner is a large machine that has a tunnel in the middle. During the test, you’ll lie on a table that moves slowly through the tunnel. Pillows or straps may be used to help keep you still during the test.
2612	A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. Clinical trials are a key way to assess new treatment approaches. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Talk to your treatment team about whether a clinical trial makes sense for you. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all the treatment options available for their type of cancer, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Who can enroll? Every clinical trial has rules for joining, called eligibility criteria. The rules may be about age, cancer type and stage, treatment history, or general health. These requirements ensure that participants are alike in certain ways in order to compare how their disease responds to a specific treatment. Informed consent Clinical trials are managed by a group of experts called a research team. The research team will review the study with you in detail, including its purpose and the risks and benefits of joining.
2613	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
2614	The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Size and extent of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck.
2615	This chapter explains treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to areas far from the rectum. Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the rectal wall. Adenomas are the most common type. While it may take many years, they can become invasive cancer. Cancer that forms in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Often, no further Polyps Polyps are growths on the lining of the bowel wall. Pedunculated polyps look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed.
2616	A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed.
2617	Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing lung cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed down from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, lung, heart, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Known risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Lung cancer basics What is lung cancer? What are the causes and risk factors? What are the symptoms of SCLC? What's the treatment for SCLC? Key points Small cell lung cancer forms from cells that line the inner airways of the lungs. It’s a cancer that can be aggressive and grows fast. This chapter gives you the basics of small cell lung cancer. What is lung cancer? The lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system. They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration.
2618	The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for. Mismatch repair (MMR) Microsatellite instability (MSI) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) NTRK gene fusion (for those with a cervical sarcoma) HER2 RET gene fusion If cancer returns to the pelvis Cervical cancer that returns to the pelvis only is known as a local or regional recurrence. If the area has not been treated with radiation and the cancer can be surgically removed, this is generally preferred. After surgery, EBRT and systemic therapy are recommended. Brachytherapy may also be given. If the area has already been treated with radiation and it is no longer an option, possible treatment options are listed below. The best option(s) for you will depend on the specific location of the new cancer growth in the pelvis. Pelvic exenteration surgery Radical hysterectomy Brachytherapy Individualized EBRT and possibly systemic therapy Systemic therapy Resection of new cancer growth Radical hysterectomy and brachytherapy are typically only considered in carefully selected patients. Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis.
2619	Talk to your care team about how often you need to have ultrasounds. Survivorship In addition to surveillance testing, a range of other care is important for cancer survivors. See Chapter 7: Survivorship for more information. Recurrence Although the thyroid has been removed, cancer can return to the neck or to areas far from the neck. The return of cancer after treatment is called recurrence. Biomarker testing Biomarkers are targetable features of a cancer. Many are mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. For thyroid cancers with 1 or more specific biomarkers, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be a treatment option if needed. Biomarker testing involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. Testing for the following biomarkers is recommended for recurrent, advanced, or metastatic cancers that can't be treated with RAI therapy: h ALK gene fusion NTRK gene fusion BRAF gene mutations RET gene fusion (found in some medullary thyroid cancers) Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) Tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) Your provider may test for these individually or as part of a group. Testing for many biomarkers at one time is called nextgeneration sequencing (NGS).
2620	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
2621	This is known as taking a medical history. They will want to know a lot about your past and current health. You will likely be asked about: Family history Illnesses, infections, and injuries Guide 1 Tests used to plan treatment of CLL Tests that are needed for planning • Medical history including B symptoms and family history • Physical exam including lymph nodes, spleen, and liver • Performance status score • Flow cytometry • Complete blood count (CBC) with differential • Comprehensive metabolic panel • Beta-2 microglobulin • FISH, DNA sequencing, and CpG-stimulated karyotype Tests that may be useful for planning, but not needed • LDH • Quantitative immunoglobulins • Reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, and direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test • Uric acid • Hepatitis B and hepatitis C test • Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate • Diagnostic CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis • Pregnancy test Prescription and over-the-counter medicines and supplements, surgeries, and blood transfusions Lifestyle choices, like your diet, how active you are, and whether you smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol They’ll also ask if you’re having any symptoms and complications of CLL.
2622	It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book. Mouth cancer Mouth or oral cancer can develop in the lips (mucosal lip), the lining inside the cheeks and lips (buccal mucosa), the front two-thirds of the tongue, the upper and lower gums (gingiva), the floor of the mouth under the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate), and the small area behind the wisdom teeth (retromolar trigone). 2 Testing for mouth cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and biopsy will be used to determine your cancer stage treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider.
2623	Stage 3A1 There is cancer in one or both ovaries. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneal lymph nodes). • Stage 3A1 (i) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is (millimeters) or smaller. • Stage 3A1 (ii) – Cancer in the lymph nodes is larger than . Stage 3A2 Cancer has spread to the tissue lining the abdomen. The cancer is so small it can only be seen with a microscope. There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3B There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is smaller than a peanut (about 2 centimeters or smaller). There may also be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. Stage 3C There is visible cancer on the tissue lining the abdomen. The area of cancer is larger than 2 cm. There might be cancer in lymph nodes in the back of the abdomen. The cancer may have also spread to the outer surface of the liver or spleen. Stage 4 Cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
2624	Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed. This depends on the following factors: The size and shape of the polyp The polypectomy results The results of testing the removed tissue Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your provider will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Sessile polyps are more likely to return after treatment. Imaging with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for these polyps to help guide decisions about surgery. Early rectal cancer If cancer that formed in a polyp isn't found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, surgery is needed. Surgery is also needed for rectal cancer that forms as a lesion on the rectal wall. The true extent of the cancer can't be known until after surgery. But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options.
2625	If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy. 5 When treatment is over Skin exams by your doctor Prevention for patients at high-risk Steps you can take Key points You’ve finished treatment. Now you may be wondering if—or when—cancer might return. Because you’ve already had squamous cell skin cancer, you are at higher risk of getting it again. You’re also at higher risk of getting other types of skin cancer. This chapter explains how you can help prevent and detect future skin cancers. Skin exams by your doctor After finishing treatment, getting regular skin exams to monitor for the return of squamous cell skin cancer is very important. These followup exams should include a complete check of the skin on your entire body, as well as the lymph nodes closest to the cancer site. You will be asked to undress and put on a paper gown or drape. Undergarments can be worn during the exam. The gown will be adjusted to allow your doctor to see different areas.
2626	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
2627	Breast cancer screening aims to find cancer early and before symptoms start. Breast cancer found earlier can be treated more successfully. Breast cancer screening saves lives by detecting cancer earlier, when it can be treated more successfully. When I first discovered the small hard pebble under the skin of my chest wall, I felt sort of silly asking for so much testing for such a tiny bump. But, nearly 10 years later, I realize that this changed my life and may be the reason why I am still here today!” 2 Screening and diagnostic tests Breast cancer basics The breast Breast cancer Inflammatory breast cancer Key points Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is a rare, aggressive cancer where cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. The breast The breast is an organ and a gland found on the chest. The breast is made of milk ducts, fat, nerves, lymph and blood vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Behind the breast is the pectoral (chest) muscle and ribs. Muscle and ligaments help hold the breast in place.
2628	In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied and less anxious when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common. Each chapter in this book ends with an important section called Questions to ask. These suggested questions will help you get more information on all aspects of your care. Take the next step and keep reading to learn what is the best care for you! What's in this book? This patient guide describes everything you need to know about living with CLL, including: Tests needed to determine the best treatment for you A period of monitoring, known as "watch and wait" Treatments available for CLL Caring for a rare complication called Richter transformation Supportive care to improve your quality of life 2 Testing for CLL How is CLL confirmed? How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis?
2629	The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts work together to make, store, and secrete bile. Bile is a fluid that helps digest fat in the food you eat. The liver also filters your blood and makes other important substances called factors that help your body function normally. This chapter will discuss the liver and give an overview of liver cancer. The liver The liver is a large organ located on the right side of the body under the rib cage. Inside the liver is a network of blood and lymph vessels. The liver filters blood, helps with blood clotting, makes bile, breaks down fats, and helps process sugar for energy. The liver also produces lymph. Lymph gives cells water and food and contains white blood cells that fight germs. The liver has two lobes, a right and left lobe. Blood enters the liver from the hepatic artery and the portal vein. Blood leaves the liver through the hepatic veins before entering the inferior vena cava and returning to the heart. The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum).
2630	The gallbladder is located near the right side of the liver and close to the first part of the small intestines (duodenum). The liver and nearby organs The gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, and small intestine are found near the liver. Bile Liver cells make bile. Bile is a yellow or green fluid made up of cholesterol, bilirubin, salts such as potassium and sodium, water, and other elements found in the body. It flows into small channels that drain into thin tubes called ducts. These ducts form larger and larger channels that flow into the left and right hepatic ducts. The left and right hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct joins with the cystic duct that connects to the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The common bile duct is joined by the pancreatic duct just before it enters the small intestine. The gallbladder The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ found under the liver. It is sometimes described as sac-like because it holds bile from the liver. Bile is stored in the gallbladder, and when you eat, it then passes through the bile ducts into the small intestine to help digest food.
2631	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
2632	Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread to other areas of the pelvis (regional prostate cancer) or the body (metastatic prostate cancer), and it's usually a life-long disease. But treatment can slow down its growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong your life. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, and other therapies. Early detection and treatment can greatly reduce the chances of getting advanced-stage prostate cancer. Many people with advancedstage prostate cancer continue to live their lives with the cancer and, in the end, may die from something else. Something to remember: When found early, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the biggest risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Not everyone with prostate cancer has symptoms. For most people, prostate cancer usually grows slowly and stays within the prostate. Early-stage prostate cancer hasn’t spread outside the prostate gland. Advanced-stage prostate cancer has spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body.
2633	Ask your health care provider if you qualify for lung cancer screening. Your wishes are always important. Talk to your health care provider and make your wishes known. 2 Risk assessment Risk factors Find out your level of risk Care team Start before you have symptoms Key points Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Some people are more likely than others to develop lung cancer. Anything that increases your chances of developing lung cancer is called a risk factor. Lung cancer screening is based on your risk factors described in this chapter. See your health care provider (HCP) regularly for checkups and cancer screenings, which may include screenings for skin, breast, prostate cancer, and other types of cancer. You might be asked to see your HCP more than every year based on your risk factors for developing lung cancer. As your family health history changes, it is important to keep your HCP updated. Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing lung cancer. However, some people are at increased risk.
2634	Your care team will look at several key characteristics to assess your risk. This chapter explains each of these characteristics. After being told you have cancer, your next thought may be, “How soon can I start treatment to get rid of it?” The fact is, a lot of patients with early-stage prostate cancer don’t need treatment right away. Many never need treatment. Figuring out whether someone needs treatment and which treatment to use requires an assessment of their risks. A risk assessment is a process for identifying potential problems and then considering what would happen if those problems occurred. In the case of early-stage prostate cancer, a risk assessment considers how likely the cancer is to remain within the prostate or to spread to outside the prostate. A risk assessment also considers whether the cancer may come back after treatment (recurrence) and, if so, whether it can be controlled with a different type of treatment. To assess risk, your care providers use these tools: risk groups, life expectancy, nomograms, and molecular biomarker tests.
2635	When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic disease that may remain in the body after colectomy. This information may be helpful in predicting the risk of the cancer returning or other outcomes. But more information is needed, and at this time ctDNA testing is only recommended as part of a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. A radiologist interprets the images and conveys the results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your scans. If you get nervous in tight spaces, let them know. You may be offered a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT Computed tomography (CT) is the main imaging test used to see colon cancer in the body. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine.
2636	What’s the best treatment? The best treatment for prostate cancer is the treatment that’s right for you. Your team will work with you to figure out the therapies that have the best chance for fighting your particular cancer. Importantly, your team should follow best practices. This book is based on the best practices for treating advanced-stage prostate cancer. Best practices come from the latest research and methods at top cancer centers. Your treatment team should personalize your care following the best practices. Many new tests and treatments are now available for advanced prostate cancer. If possible, seek care or a second opinion from a medical center that specializes in prostate cancer. Key points Prostate cancer develops when cells in the prostate gland grow out of control. Age is the leading risk factor for prostate cancer. As you age, your chances of developing prostate cancer increase. Having a close family member with prostate cancer means that you have a higher chance of getting it yourself. Everyone with a prostate is at risk for prostate cancer. Black people and people with certain inherited genetic mutations are at greater risk.
2637	How is treatment planned? What if I’m pregnant? What’s a prognosis? What’s next? Key points Questions to ask You’ll need specific tests to confirm you have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). If CLL is found, you’ll need more tests to decide when to start treatment, which treatment will work best, and what supportive care you’ll need. How is CLL confirmed? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is confirmed with a blood test. Diagnosis by blood tests You’ll have a blood test where you’ll provide a small sample of your blood, which will be sent to a lab for testing. A specialist called a hematopathologist is an expert at diagnosing cancers of blood and immune cells. They look at blood, bone Immunophenotype Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) often has a common pattern of surface proteins on its cells. An example of these proteins is CD20 (shown). It helps identify the correct type of cancer. For instance, CLL cells have proteins called CD200 and LEF1, but another type of lymphoma, called mantle cell lymphoma, does not have them. Derivative work of NIAID - Rituxima Binding to CD20 on a B Cell Surface, CC BY 0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=39933221 marrow, and lymph node samples for signs of disease.
2638	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
2639	The mouth, or oral cavity, is the first part of the digestive and respiratory (breathing) systems. The lips, cheeks, palate, teeth, and tongue make up the mouth. The mouth helps us breathe, talk, chew, taste, swallow, eat, and drink. The cheeks and lips hold food in the mouth and help to form and sound words. Parts of the mouth The 2 main functions of the mouth are eating and speaking. The mouth is also known as the oral cavity or the buccal cavity. Some important structures of the mouth: Hard palate is the hard, bony part of the roof of the mouth. The mouth Tongue is a muscular organ in your mouth that aids in chewing, speaking, and breathing. Lips surround the opening of the mouth. Buccal (oral) mucosa is the lining inside the cheeks and inside where the lips touch the teeth. Alveolar ridge is the bony, raised area of the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) jaw that holds the sockets of the teeth. Gums (gingiva) surround the base of the teeth and help keep them in place. Retromolar trigone is the small area behind the wisdom teeth.
2640	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2641	Different chemotherapy drugs have different cycles. Common cycles are 14, 21, or 28 days long. Having chemotherapy in cycles gives your body a chance to recover after receiving the treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy If cancer cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or if an MRI of the spine shows cancer, chemotherapy may be infused directly into the CSF in some cases. This is known as intrathecal or intra-CSF chemotherapy. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used in select cases or as part of specific treatment program for primary CNS lymphoma. Intraocular chemotherapy In rare cases, primary CNS lymphoma may occur in the eye. In these situations, the chemotherapy may be infused into a vein or directly into the eye. Possible side effects from intraocular chemotherapy include eye irritation, infection, inflammation, and cataracts. Cataracts can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Side effects of chemotherapy Like other therapies, the side effects of chemotherapy depend on many factors. These include the drug, the dose, and the person. Chemotherapy, especially in high doses, may not be the right treatment for people who are frail or older. These individuals may have a difficult time dealing with the harsh side effects.
2642	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
2643	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
2644	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2645	Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia.
2646	Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation. Amplification – When a part or whole chromosome or gene is increased (for example, duplicated) Deletion – When part of a chromosome or gene is missing such as del(5q) Insertion – When a new part of a chromosome or gene is included Inversion – Switching of parts within one chromosome such as inv(16) and inv(3) Point mutation – When part of a gene is changed Chromosome translocation and gene rearrangement – Switching of parts between 2 chromosomes. When described at the chromosome level, it is called a translocation. When described at the gene level, it is called rearrangement. For example, the chromosome translocation is written as t(8;21)(q22;q1) and its gene rearrangement is written as RUNX1::RUNX1T Leukemia predisposition syndromes Some hereditary cancer syndromes can be passed down from biological parent to child. A family history of leukemia can affect treatment. A skin punch biopsy might be done if a predisposition condition is suspected. If your blood was tested at diagnosis, you would see the genetic changes of the leukemia.
2647	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
2648	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
2649	Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a highthroughput method used to determine the DNA sequence or gene changes of cancer cells in your tumor. This method would only be used if enough tumor tissue remains after other biomarker testing has been completed. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a lab process that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies called PCR product might be used for NGS. Genetic risk testing About 1 out of 10 breast cancers are hereditary. Depending on your family history or other features of your cancer, your health care provider might refer you for hereditary genetic testing to learn more about your cancer. A genetic counselor or trained provider will speak to you about the results. Tests results may be used to guide treatment planning. Genetic testing is done using blood or saliva (spitting into a cup or a cheek swab).
2650	If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for Lynch syndrome. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is another rare inherited cancer syndrome. FAP can cause hundreds to thousands of polyps to form in the colon and rectum. The polyps start as benign growths, but over time can become invasive rectal cancer. There are other inherited syndromes that are even more rare than Lynch syndrome and FAP. If your provider thinks you may have an inherited syndrome, they will refer you to a genetic counselor. This expert can talk with you and your family about getting tested for syndromes related to rectal cancer. If they determine that testing is appropriate, they can order a blood or saliva test to see if you have an inherited gene mutation. Blood tests General health tests A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets in a blood sample. White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots.
2651	T0 – No tumor is found, but neck lymph nodes test positive for Epstein-Barr virus. Tis – This is carcinoma in situ, meaning that cancerous cells are found only in the squamous cell layer. T1 – Tumor is confined to the nasopharynx or has grown into the oropharynx and/or nasal cavity, but not into the parapharyngeal space. The parapharyngeal space is a triangular area near the pharynx (throat), between the base of the skull and the hyoid bone (the bone under the tongue). It is in the deep tissues of the neck and contains mostly fat, as well as blood vessels (including the carotid artery and jugular vein), nerves, lymph nodes, and parts of the salivary (spit) gland. T2 – Tumor has grown into parapharyngeal space, and/or nearby soft tissue (muscles such as the medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, and prevertebral muscles) Cervical cancer basics The cervix Cervical changes Risk factors Types of cervical cancer Key points Cervical cancer is a common cancer of the female reproductive system. Most cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection.
2652	Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think!
2653	Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. This means that the cells of the cancer look like the cells of a sarcoma (cancer of the connective tissues, such as muscles, nerves, fat, blood vessels, and fibrous tissue). Sarcomatoid renal cancers occur in less than of RCC tumors but when present tend to grow more quickly than other types of kidney cancer and are more likely to spread to other parts of the body. This makes them more difficult to treat. How kidney cancer spreads Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Kidney cancer can also spread to other parts of the body in a process called metastasis. In metastasis, cancer cells travel through your blood or lymph to form new tumors outside of the kidney. The new tumors are called metastatic tumors or metastases. Local spread – In locally advanced disease, cancer has spread to a nearby area close to the primary tumor. Kidney cancer can invade nearby tissues like surrounding fat, blood vessels, lymph nodes, adrenal glands, and Gerota’s fascia.
2654	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
2655	Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer. As a result, today’s treatments work Small cell lung cancer cells appear small and blue when viewed with a microscope. better than treatments in the past. Also, many people with cancer have more than one treatment option. The two most common types of lung cancer are: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), further divided into: • Adenocarcinoma • Squamous cell carcinoma • Adenosquamous carcinoma • Large cell carcinoma • Sarcomatoid carcinoma Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), further divided into: • Small cell carcinoma • Combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinoma The names of the cancers refer to their appearance under a microscope. When viewed with a microscope, SCLCs appear small and blue. Sometimes lung tumors contain both small cell and non-small cell lung cancer cells. These are called combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinomas and are usually treated like small cell lung cancer. SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book.
2656	Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too.
2657	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
2658	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
2659	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
2660	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
2661	The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures. You may be able to go home the next day. Open biopsy Like a resection, an open biopsy is a surgical procedure that involves making a small opening in the skull (craniotomy). First, you’ll be given anesthesia that will let you sleep through the procedure. Your neurosurgeon will cut open a section of your scalp and then remove a piece of skull bone. Using small surgical knives and other special instruments, the neurosurgeon will carefully remove a piece or pieces of the tumor. The segment of skull bone will be replaced and the incision will be sewn up. Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope.
2662	All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA. Mohs surgery can be done in a medical office or surgical suite and should be done by a dermatologic (skin) surgeon who has special training and experience in this procedure. Most patients remain awake during the procedure. After the area is numbed, the visible tumor is first removed using a scalpel. Next, a thin layer of surrounding tissue is removed from under and around the wound. The edges and underside of this tissue are evaluated by the Mohs surgeon using a microscope while you wait. If cancer cells are seen by the surgeon, another thin layer of tissue is removed only from the area of the wound where the cancer was seen. When a removed layer shows no cancer cells at its edges, the procedure is over. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is another option for treating squamous cell skin cancer. A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake.
2663	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
2664	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2665	A CT scan is done in the radiology department, in a big machine that looks like a tunnel. The scan won’t hurt, but if you need contrast you will need to get a needle placed in your arm. A radiologist will review your scans and send the results to your oncologist. 66 I am so grateful I had a consultation with a CLL specialist. It was reassuring to finally speak to a CLL specialist. The doctor answered all my questions thoroughly. I am very satisfied with the advice I received." What if I’m pregnant? Some cancer treatments can harm an unborn baby. If you have the potential to become pregnant, your cancer care team will give you a pregnancy test before treatment. Your treatment options will depend on the results. Preserving fertility Many people have healthy babies despite cancer and its treatment. If you wish to have kids, there are important steps to take before treatment. Even if you are unsure, talk to your cancer care team. Fertility is the ability to have a baby. Some cancer treatments can damage the body parts needed for fertility. Ask your care team if you’re at risk for impaired fertility.
2666	Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone. A bone tumor may be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). Bone tumors often occur in areas of the bone that grow rapidly (the metaphysis). This book will discuss the following: Chondrosarcoma – starts in the cells that form cartilage. Cartilage is a tough, flexible tissue that covers the ends of bones to form a smooth surface that makes a joint. Also, cartilage gives structure to the nose, ears, larynx, and other parts of the body. Chordoma – starts in notochordal cells that form the spine and vertebrae. Chordomas are usually found in the lower spinal column (sacrum) or at the base of the skull. Ewing sarcoma – starts in the bone marrow and commonly occurs in the diaphysis of long bones or flat bones like the pelvis or scapula (shoulder blade). Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) – is an overgrowth of cells found in the part of the bone called the metaphysis and extends into the area of the bone that widens to form a joint (epiphysis).
2667	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
2668	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
2669	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
2670	SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book. NCCN has a two-part book series on NSCLC, found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are the causes and risk factors? Smoking cigarettes is the main cause of SCLC. Almost everyone with SCLC smokes or has smoked. Many people with SCLC have regularly smoked more than a pack a day. Exposure to second-hand smoke also increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from combustible tobacco products. Although rare in Western countries, there are occasions where people with no smoking history develop this disease. There are other unknown causes of SCLC. Researchers are still learning why some people who smoke never get lung cancer and others who have never smoked do. A person’s chances of getting SCLC are higher in the following situations: Over 70 years of age Prior radiation therapy to the chest Exposure to cancer-causing chemicals (also known as carcinogens), such as radon and asbestos If you don’t smoke, don’t start. If you do smoke, quit. New lung tumors are less likely to develop after quitting smoking.
2671	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
2672	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
2673	Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). SCC of the throat (oropharynx) is the focus of this book. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue found in the throat. 2 Testing for throat cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment p16 (HPV) testing Imaging tests Scoping procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment.
2674	Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, heart, liver, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Risk is based on: Those with cirrhosis Those without cirrhosis Known risk factors are listed in Guide Cirrhosis Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. It is a type of long-term (chronic) liver disease where liver cells are replaced by scar tissue. If you have cirrhosis, you should be screened for liver cancer.
2675	It also produces lymph. The liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts are part of the hepatobiliary system. Cancer that starts in the liver is called primary liver cancer. Secondary liver cancer is when other cancer types spread to the liver. There is more than one type of primary liver cancer in adults. The most common type is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is the focus of this book. Anything that increases your chances of developing liver cancer is called a risk factor. Screening is when tests are done on a regular basis to detect a disease in someone without symptoms. If you have cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B, then you should be enrolled in a liver cancer screening program. Screening helps find disease early when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Although living with liver disease is physically and emotionally challenging, I have been able to live a normal life – traveling, snorkeling, having children.
2676	Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. Cancerous cells found only inside the ducts or lobules is called noninvasive. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is found only in the ducts. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple x-rays will be taken. A computer combines the x-rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days. Diagnostic mammograms are used for those who have symptoms such as a lump, pain, nipple thickening or discharge, or whose breasts have changed shape or size.
2677	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
2678	Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared with white males. Prostate cancer is diagnosed less often in Hispanic and Asian males than in white and Black males. Several things may contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Specialists are researching each of these areas. In light of these issues, Black males may want to talk with their health care providers about getting screening tests earlier than what’s recommended for other males. What does aggressive mean? When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more rapidly than average. Aggressive is also used to describe therapy that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Diet and lifestyle No one particular diet has been found to prevent prostate cancer or to cause prostate cancer. However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer.
2679	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
2680	Discuss openly the risks and benefits of specific treatments and procedures. Weigh options and share concerns with your doctor. If you take the time to build a relationship with your doctor, it will help you feel supported when considering options and making treatment decisions. Second opinion It is normal to want to start treatment as soon as possible. While cancer should not be ignored, there is time to have another doctor review your test results and suggest a treatment plan. This is called getting a second opinion, and it’s a normal part of cancer care. Even doctors get second opinions! Things you can do to prepare: Check with your insurance company about its rules on second opinions. There may be out-of-pocket costs to see doctors who are not part of your insurance plan. Make plans to have copies of all your records sent to the doctor you will see for your second opinion. Support groups Many people diagnosed with cancer find support groups to be helpful. Support groups often include people at different stages of treatment. Some people may be newly diagnosed, while others may be finished with treatment.
2681	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
2682	Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy. For tumors with the folate receptor alpha (FRα) biomarker, the targeted therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine-gynx (Elahere) is preferred for recurrence treatment. It is a type of antibody drug conjugate (ADC). Other options may include endocrine therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. These options are described more next. Enrolling in a clinical trial is encouraged if you are eligible. Platinum-sensitive cancer If you enter complete remission after platinumbased chemotherapy and cancer returns more than 6 months later, the cancer is considered platinum-sensitive. This means that platinumbased chemotherapy drugs work well against the cancer. Because it worked well before, platinum chemotherapy is typically recommended for recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. This is especially true for the first recurrence. The targeted therapy bevacizumab may be added to chemotherapy. In certain circumstances, before starting recurrence treatment, your doctor may suggest surgery to remove all visible cancer. This is called secondary cytoreductive surgery. If recurrence treatment with platinumbased chemotherapy works well or very well, maintenance therapy is an option. If bevacizumab was included in your recurrence chemotherapy regimen, it can be continued alone as maintenance therapy.
2683	This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches. A wound might be left open (rather than being stitched together) and left to heal by itself, filling in and closing up naturally. This is called secondary intention healing. It could mean you will need regular dressings to the area for up to 6 weeks, but the full time to heal depends on the size, depth, and area of the wound. A linear closure is another common form of wound healing. The surgeon will cut a small amount of extra skin to change the shape of the wound from a circle to a fusiform (an oval that looks like a football) to help the surgeon stitch the wound together in a line. Other wounds may need skin grafts or other types of surgery (such as rearranging skin, known as “flapping”) to heal well and lessen scarring. A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area.
2684	Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues. Invasive breast cancer is breast cancer that has spread from the milk ducts or milk glands (lobules) into the surrounding breast tissue or nearby lymph nodes. Metastasis Unlike normal cells, cancer cells can spread and form tumors in other parts of the body called metastases. In this process, cancer cells break away from the first (primary) tumor and travel through blood or lymph vessels to distant sites. Once in other sites, cancer cells may form secondary tumors. Since cancer cells can spread through the blood, it is still possible to develop metastases even when the axillary lymph nodes are negative for cancer. Cancer that has spread to a nearby body part such as the axillary lymph nodes is called a local metastasis. It might be referred to as locoregional disease or locally advanced. Cancer that has spread to a body part far from the primary tumor is called a distant metastasis. Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes.
2685	This method is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. Sometimes, additional instruments (catheters, or thin hollow tubes) are placed in the tumor itself or in tissues next to the tumor (interstitial brachytherapy). For the treatment of cervical cancer, intracavitary brachytherapy is most often used. Interstitial brachytherapy is a specialized technique that is used for more advanced cancers that involve the parametrium. It is best performed at cancer centers with experience in this method. Brachytherapy for cervical cancer may be given in short bursts, called high dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy, or in long bursts, called low dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy. Most centers currently use HDR brachytherapy. Treatment is typically given in 3 to 5 sessions over 2 weeks. If you have not had a hysterectomy, a device called an applicator is inserted into the uterus through the vagina. A “tandem and ring” applicator is commonly used for HDR brachytherapy. The tandem is a long, thin tube that extends into the uterus. The ring is a hollow circle that stays in the vagina, pressed against the cervix. A tandem and ovoid applicator uses hollow, rounded capsules instead of a ring. General anesthesia or deep sedation is often required, especially for the first applicator placement.
2686	When facing colorectal cancer, the best care begins with self-care." ctDNA There is growing interest in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing for people with earlystage colon cancer. Also called a liquid biopsy, this test looks for small pieces of DNA released by tumor cells into the blood. It can detect microscopic disease that may remain in the body after colectomy. This information may be helpful in predicting the risk of the cancer returning or other outcomes. But more information is needed, and at this time ctDNA testing is only recommended as part of a clinical trial. Imaging Imaging tests can show areas of cancer inside the body. A radiologist interprets the images and conveys the results to your oncologist. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your scans. If you get nervous in tight spaces, let them know. You may be offered a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT Computed tomography (CT) is the main imaging test used to see colon cancer in the body. During the scan you will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine.
2687	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
2688	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
2689	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
2690	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
2691	During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis. Urethra: A tube that carries urine from the bladder and out of the body. The prostate wraps around the urethra just beneath the bladder. Seminal vesicles: Two glands that make another part of the fluid that becomes semen. The seminal vesicles are located above the prostate and behind the bladder. Bladder: An organ that holds urine. What causes prostate cancer? Many people who develop prostate cancer wonder where it came from and how they got it. Cancer researchers don’t know exactly what causes prostate cells to grow out of control (become cancerous). The fact is, everyone with a prostate has a risk of getting prostate cancer. But several factors are linked to a higher risk of prostate cancer. These are called risk factors. A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting cancer. Risk factors don’t necessarily cause prostate cancer, but people with prostate cancer usually have one or more of these risk factors: Age The biggest risk factor for prostate cancer is age. Prostate cancer is diagnosed most often in those aged 65 years and above.
2692	Other symptoms also sometimes occur. Gliomas can cause vision problems such as blurred vision, double vision, or loss of peripheral (side) vision. Sensory disturbances include numbness, tingling, or burning sensations often on one side of the body. And high-grade gliomas are linked to blood clots in the legs and the lungs, which can cause leg swelling, chest pain, and shortness of breath. If you have any of these symptoms, your provider may want to take a closer look. This is where imaging comes in, which is discussed on the next page. Areas of the brain and their functions PARIETAL LOBE intelligence language reading sensation sensory perception OCCIPITAL LOBE vision color perception Neurological exam A neurological exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, thinking, balance, coordination, reflexes, strength, hearing, and senses of touch and smell. You may also have an eye exam to check the health of the nerves in the back of your eyes. Performance status Your team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like working, taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status.
2693	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
2694	Other symptoms also sometimes occur. Gliomas can cause vision problems such as blurred vision, double vision, or loss of peripheral (side) vision. Sensory disturbances include numbness, tingling, or burning sensations often on one side of the body. And high-grade gliomas are linked to blood clots in the legs and the lungs, which can cause leg swelling, chest pain, and shortness of breath. If you have any of these symptoms, your provider may want to take a closer look. This is where imaging comes in, which is discussed on the next page. Areas of the brain and their functions PARIETAL LOBE intelligence language reading sensation sensory perception OCCIPITAL LOBE vision color perception Neurological exam A neurological exam involves some simple tests to check your alertness, thinking, balance, coordination, reflexes, strength, hearing, and senses of touch and smell. You may also have an eye exam to check the health of the nerves in the back of your eyes. Performance status Your team will want to know how well you can do ordinary day-to-day activities—like working, taking a walk, climbing stairs, cooking dinner, carrying laundry, or taking a bath or shower. This evaluation is called performance status.
2695	This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep). Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to which cancer cells most likely spread from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there is more than one sentinel lymph node. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a surgery that removes tissue samples to examine sentinel nodes. The lymph nodes will be checked for cancer cells by a pathologist in a lab. Sometimes people can have an SLNB at the same time as surgery. The results will be used to stage the cancer and plan treatment. To locate the sentinel lymph node(s), your surgeon will inject a radioactive, blue-colored substance into your skin near the tumor. The substance will drain into the sentinel lymph nodes. Your surgeon will identify the sentinel lymph nodes using a device and remove them through a small cut in your skin. This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches.
2696	This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep). Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to which cancer cells most likely spread from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there is more than one sentinel lymph node. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a surgery that removes tissue samples to examine sentinel nodes. The lymph nodes will be checked for cancer cells by a pathologist in a lab. Sometimes people can have an SLNB at the same time as surgery. The results will be used to stage the cancer and plan treatment. To locate the sentinel lymph node(s), your surgeon will inject a radioactive, blue-colored substance into your skin near the tumor. The substance will drain into the sentinel lymph nodes. Your surgeon will identify the sentinel lymph nodes using a device and remove them through a small cut in your skin. This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches.
2697	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
2698	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
2699	Stage 0 has two subgroups: Stage 0a describes cancer cells that grow from the inner lining toward the hollow center of the bladder, rather than into the bladder wall. Stage 0is stands for carcinoma in situ (CIS). This is a flat patch of cancer cells that hasn’t grown any farther than where it started. It’s still on the surface of the bladder lining and has yet to invade deeper layers. However, carcinoma in situ is fast-growing, aggressive, and can be very serious. Stage 1 Stage 1 has grown through the inner lining of the bladder wall and into the layer of connective tissue. But stage 1 hasn’t invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall (non– muscle-invasive). Stage 2 Stage 2 bladder cancer has grown into the muscle layer (muscle-invasive), but it hasn’t reached the fatty layer covering the outside of the bladder nor has it spread anywhere else. Stage 3 Stage 3 has grown through the bladder wall and into the fatty layer surrounding the bladder. It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis).
2700	Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins. This helps your immune system locate and then destroy the cancer cells. Rituximab is given through an IV infusion. Side effects of immunotherapy Rituximab and other immunotherapies may cause drowsiness, fatigue, constipation, joint pain, loss of appetite, low blood cell counts, serious blood clots, and rashes. Keep track of your symptoms and side effects Think about ways to keep track of your symptoms and side effects when they happen. You can make notes in a weekly diary, on a calendar, or in a smartphone app. Or create your own way to record the symptoms or side effects you experience. Some things to track include: Each treatment and any side effects it caused How long the side effect lasted How the side effect affected your quality of life If you’re given a treatment for a side effect, note how well the treatment worked Show this information to your treatment team at each visit. Tracking your side effects gives your care team a better sense of how you’re doing.
2701	About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts? 7 What's in this book? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of blood cancer that starts in the stem cells of bone marrow. There are many subtypes of AML found in adults. This chapter will provide an overview of AML. What is AML? In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood. In turn, there are not enough healthy red blood cells, platelets, and white blood cells. This causes serious health issues. For this reason, AML is fatal if left untreated. Subtypes of AML There are many subtypes of AML. They are grouped and treated based on the presence or absence of certain gene mutations or abnormal chromosomes and other factors. In addition to AML, this book includes information about the following: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
2702	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
2703	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
2704	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
2705	The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs.
2706	Sessile polyps are flatter and don't have a stalk. treatment is needed. In other cases, resection (surgical removal) of a larger piece of the rectum is needed. This depends on the following factors: The size and shape of the polyp The polypectomy results The results of testing the removed tissue Before deciding whether resection is needed after a polypectomy, your provider will review the results of testing with you and discuss your options. Sessile polyps are more likely to return after treatment. Imaging with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) or pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended for these polyps to help guide decisions about surgery. Early rectal cancer If cancer that formed in a polyp isn't found early enough to be removed by polypectomy, surgery is needed. Surgery is also needed for rectal cancer that forms as a lesion on the rectal wall. The true extent of the cancer can't be known until after surgery. But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options.
2707	The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells. The radioactive part of the tracer lets your care team see how your cells are using the Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) A very common type of skin cancer Occurs more often in lighter-skinned people Is commonly found in areas of the body exposed to sun, especially the head and neck Rarely spreads to distant areas of the body Can spread in the area where it first forms If not treated can cause severe skin damage and even death Most people (over ) can be cured by completely removing the CSCC substance. This helps them find any usage that is not normal. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. Not all bright spots are cancer. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan.
2708	Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs. The following tumors are considered high risk because of their location and/or size: Tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs that are between 2 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a nickel) and 4 cm (about the size of a quarter) Any size tumor on the head, face, neck, hands, feet, shins, or sex organs The following tumors are considered very high risk because of their size: h Any tumor over 4 cm in any location Get to know your care team Keep the names and contact information for each member of your care team on hand, so you know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Tumor shape If the clinical extent (border) of the tumor is well-defined, it is considered low risk. If the border isn’t well-defined and has an uneven shape, it is considered high risk. Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected.
2709	Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid. There is a lot to know about oncology nutrition. Many anal cancer survivors find it helpful to talk to a dietitian that specializes in the nutritional needs of anal cancer, or digestive system cancer, survivors. Pelvic floor physical therapy The pelvic floor is a group of muscles that supports the organs of the pelvis. These muscles play a key role in bowel and bladder control and well as sexual function and arousal. There are ways to strengthen these muscles before and after treatment. This is known as pelvic floor physical therapy, and there are health care professionals that specialize in it. Ask your treatment team for help finding a pelvic floor specialist in your area. Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist.
2710	Other notable side effects Some side effects happen more commonly in people with bladder cancer, particularly after bladder cancer surgery. While you may not get these side effects, you should be aware of them as you consider the benefits and risks of different treatments: h Sexual dysfunction – Treatment or cancer itself may interfere with your ability to have sex. Sexual dysfunction also includes a decreased desire to have sex. This may be due to a lack of energy, being self-conscious about your body after surgery, or feeling stressed out and depressed. Trouble controlling the flow of urine – Urine may come out when you’re not expecting it. This is referred to as urinary incontinence. But there are things you can do, like pelvic floor exercises, that can help you regain control of urine function. Many side effects can be managed. Some can even be prevented. Ask your treatment team for a complete list of short- and long-term side effects and information on how to manage them. Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences.
2711	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
2712	When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still.
2713	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
2714	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
2715	Consider seeing a sexual health therapist. These health care professionals specialize in helping cancer survivors and others overcome and manage sexual side effects of cancer treatment. Many cancer treatment centers have programs focused solely on sexual health after anal cancer treatment. Ask your doctor about resources available through your cancer center that can help minimize the impact of cancer treatment on your sexual health. Mental health and wellness The effects of anal cancer and its treatment can be difficult to cope with. Many survivors report having an overall lower quality of life after cancer treatment. In addition to effects on bowel, bladder, and sexual function, more general effects such as fatigue, trouble breathing (dyspnea), and difficulty sleeping (insomnia) are common. Many anal cancer survivors are also hesitant to share their diagnosis out of a fear of being judged by others. This can be isolating and distressful. Tell your treatment team about these symptoms. If you are anxious, distressed, depressed, or are just having trouble coping with life after cancer, you are not alone. Expect your treatment team to ask about your mental health. If they don’t, speak up.
2716	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
2717	High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals. Other risk factors The health- and lifestyle-related factors listed below can also increase the risk of anal cancer. Some of these factors lead to a higher risk because they weaken the immune system. This can can make it harder for the body to clear HPV infection. Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Taking anti-rejection medicines (immunosuppressants) after an organ transplant A history of cervical, vulvar, or vaginal cancer or precancer A history of anal precancer A history of blood cancer such as lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or multiple myeloma Certain autoimmune disorders, such as Crohn’s disease Smoking A history of anal sex A history of sexually transmitted infection (STI) Risk reduction Anal cancer starts as areas of abnormal cells, called lesions, in or near the anus. These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer.
2718	Curettage and electrodesiccation C&E or shave excision are recommended treatment options for low-risk, local CSCC. Usually it is considered for early, small CSCC on the surface of the skin. If the tumor ends up being deeper than expected into the skin during the procedure, a standard surgical or shave excision should be performed rather than C&E to remove deep areas of cancerous tissue. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is a recommended treatment option for low-risk, local CSCC. If testing after surgery finds cancer cells in the surrounding tissue removed with the tumor, more treatment is needed. Further treatment options include: Mohs surgery or resection with PDEMA Another surgical excision Radiation therapy (if more surgery cannot be done) Mohs surgery or PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is a recommended treatment option for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes.  See Part 2: Types of treatment for more detailed descriptions of these treatments. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works.
2719	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
2720	means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin. Curettage and electrodesiccation (C&E) C&E is done in a medical office with local numbing to the area. In this method, the visible tumor is first scraped off using a thin tool with a sharp loop or spoon at the end. Next, an electric needle is used to cauterize (burn) the base of the wound. This usually kills any remaining cancer cells and helps stop bleeding. This two-step system of scraping then burning may be done up to three times in the same session. C&E is a recommended option for early CSCC on the surface of the skin that has not spread to lymph nodes. PDEMA/Mohs surgery Peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (PDEMA) is a type of surgery often used for treatment on the head, face, hands, feet, shins, and genital areas, because it can remove the cancer while sparing as much normal tissue as possible. It should be performed by surgeons who have special training and experience in this procedure. All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA.
2721	Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship. Anal cancer survivors may experience both short- and long-term health effects of cancer and its treatment. These effects are different for everyone and depend on the treatment(s) received. Your primary care doctor After finishing cancer treatment, your primary care doctor, also known as a general practitioner (GP) or primary care physician (PCP), will play an important role in your care. Your oncologist (cancer doctor) and PCP should work together to make sure you get the follow-up care you need. Your oncologist will develop a written survivorship care plan that includes: A summary of your cancer treatment history, including surgeries, radiation treatments, and chemotherapy A description of possible short-term, late, and long-term side effects Recommendations for monitoring for the return of cancer Information on when your care will be transferred to your PCP Your primary care doctor Clear roles and responsibilities for both your cancer care team and your PCP Recommendations on your overall health and well-being Late and long-term side effects Some side effects of anal cancer treatment can linger longer than expected.
2722	They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a form of systemic therapy that focuses on specific or unique features of cancer cells. Targeted therapies seek out how cancer cells grow, divide, and move in the body. These drugs stop the action of molecules that help cancer cells grow and/or survive. Some examples of targeted therapies can be found in Guide CD33 Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is a type of targeted therapy that is linked to a chemotherapy drug. It attaches to a cell surface protein called CD33, then enters the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Many leukemic blasts have CD33 proteins. Mature blood cells do not have CD33 and are not affected. GO may delay blood count recovery and cause liver issues. Core binding factor Core binding factor (CBF) creates a shortage of all types of mature blood cells. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities.
2723	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
2724	Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots. If surgery first isn’t an option Having surgery first may not be an option. This could be due to the size or location of the tumor, other health conditions, or your overall health. In this case, chemotherapy is given first to shrink the cancer. You will need a biopsy to confirm that the tumor is ovarian cancer before starting chemotherapy. At this time, preferred regimens include: h Paclitaxel and carboplatin Paclitaxel, carboplatin, bevacizumab, and maintenance bevacizumab While the above regimens are preferred, there are other recommended options for chemotherapy. Your team will take into account any medical conditions and your overall health. These regimens may change as new information becomes available. After a few cycles of chemotherapy (2 to 3 months), your doctor will check to see how well chemotherapy worked and if surgery is an option. The goal of surgery is to remove as much of the cancer as possible, as well as the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus. Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS).
2725	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
2726	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
2727	What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction? Biomarker-based treatment If the cancer has any of the biomarkers listed in Guide 3 below, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be an option. For information on the side effects of immunotherapy, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer basics The throat The pharynx Head and neck cancers Throat cancer Key points The throat is located in the back of the mouth and in the neck. Cancer can form in part of the throat called the oropharynx. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and the base of the tongue. The throat The throat is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and esophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach).
2728	If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works. Smoking greatly increases your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. It also increases your chances of developing other cancers. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most smokers. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your doctor about counseling and medicines that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco High-risk or very high-risk Surgery is the preferred treatment for high-risk or very high-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes. The options for surgery include: Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA (preferred for very high-risk CSCC) Standard surgical excision If you are not a candidate for surgery, see If surgery is not an option on the next page. Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is the preferred treatment option for very high-risk cancer that has not spread to lymph nodes.
2729	All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome. Keep in mind that your treatment plan may change. Testing may provide new information. How well the treatment is working may change the plan. Or you may change your mind about treatment. Any of these changes may require a new treatment plan. Stress and symptom control Anxiety and depression are common in people with cancer. At your cancer center, cancer navigators, social workers, and others can help. Help may include support groups, talk therapy, exercising, spending time with loved ones, or medication. You may be unemployed or miss work during treatment. Or, you may have little or no health insurance. Talk to your treatment team about work, insurance, or money concerns. They will include information in the treatment plan to help you manage the costs of care. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app for more information. Supportive care Supportive care aims to relieve the symptoms of cancer or the side effects of cancer treatment.
2730	This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis. This Low anterior resection (LAR) LAR is a type of abdominal surgery used to remove tumors in the mid to upper rectum. The rectal tumor and part or all of the sigmoid colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. allows for the possibility of having near-normal bowel movements. Your surgeon is likely to delay reattaching the bowel in order to let the surgical site heal. In this case, or if the colon can't be connected to the anus, a colostomy is made. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening (a stoma) on the surface of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through the stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. A colostomy may only be needed for a short time to allow the rectum to heal before being reconnected to the colon. But sometimes it is needed permanently. Abdominoperineal resection This type of transabdominal surgery is used for tumors in the lower rectum.
2731	But it can be estimated based on certain test results. This best guess is called the clinical or pre-surgery stage. It is used to determine your treatment options. Endoscopic submucosal dissection If testing finds that the tumor hasn’t grown beyond the second (muscle) layer of the rectal wall, it is a T1 tumor. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a recommended option for all T1 tumors. This minimally invasive procedure removes small rectal cancers in one piece, often curing them. Another name for this procedure is endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). First, an endoscope is used to locate the tumor in the rectal wall. A tool is guided through the scope to inject fluid between the tumor and the layer of muscle beneath it. This helps lift and separate the tumor, making it easier to cut off. Most people don’t need more treatment. Surveillance after ESD Checking for recurrence is recommended for at least 5 years after ESD. During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD.
2732	It has 3 main types of cells: Squamous cells – These cells are flat cells found in the upper part of the epidermis. Basal cells – Found in the lower part of the epidermis, basal cells constantly divide to form new cells that replace the squamous cells on the skin’s surface. Melanocytes – Melanocytes are cells located in the lower part of the epidermis that produce melanin. Melanin is responsible for our hair, skin, and eye color. It also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. This book is only about basal cell skin cancer. For more information on squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes.
2733	Observation is also an option if there was a complete response to chemotherapy. This means there are no signs of cancer in the body. How long does maintenance therapy last? The length of maintenance therapy after initial treatment depends on the specific drug(s). Olaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. Olaparib bevacizumab together can be given for up to 15 months, with the olaparib continued for up to 2 years total. Niraparib alone can be given for up to 3 years. Rucaparib alone can be given for up to 2 years. These recommendations can change with ongoing research. Keep in mind that any maintenance therapy will be stopped if the cancer grows or spreads. It will also be stopped if the side effects become too harsh or make it unsafe to continue. There isn’t much research on maintenance therapy with a PARP inhibitor after initial treatment for stage 2 ovarian cancer. If your cancer is stage 2 and you are eligible for maintenance therapy, talk to your provider about your options. Surveillance When there are no signs of cancer after treatment, expect to see your oncologist on a regular basis for physical and pelvic exams.
2734	CT scans are good at showing if the cancer has spread outside of the ovaries. They may also show if nearby lymph nodes are bigger than normal. This can be a sign that the cancer has spread. If you can have it, a substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Before the scan you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent will also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, allergic reactions can occur. Tell your team if you've had an allergic reaction to contrast in the past. A CT scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. While you lie on a table that moves through the tunnel, the scanner will rotate an x-ray beam around you to take pictures from many angles. MRI If the ultrasound images are unclear, you may have magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your abdomen and pelvis. An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation.
2735	Intravenous (IV) contrast is often used. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your doctors if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past, especially to iodine or to shellfish such as shrimp. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast What’s the difference between a screening and diagnostic mammogram? A mammogram is a picture of the inside of your breast made using x-rays. During a mammogram, the breast is pressed between two plates while you stand in different positions. Multiple -rays will be taken. A computer combines the -rays to make detailed pictures. Screening mammograms are done on a regular basis when there are no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Results take a few days.
2736	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
2737	Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist. Over-the-counter ointments like Aquaphor or Silvadene can soothe the skin and help with healing. Other short-term side effects of radiation therapy include diarrhea, fatigue, frequent urination or pain while urinating, and nausea. Most of these decrease over time when treatment is over. Radiation therapy side effects may not be felt immediately. They can appear and worsen later in the cycle or even after it is complete. Radiation therapy for anal cancer can also have long-term and potentially serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. See “Fertility and family planning” on page 14 and Part 3: Survivorship for information on ways to help prevent, limit, or manage these effects. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the use of anti-cancer medicines. It is a type of systemic therapy. Most commonly, chemotherapy is given intravenously. This means the medicine(s) are slowly infused into the body through a vein. The medicine(s) travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy can also be given orally. Radiation therapy An advanced radiation technique called intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is the preferred method for treating anal cancer.
2738	When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above. Ovarian transposition is a surgery that moves one or both ovaries out of the range of the External beam radiation therapy A large machine aims radiation at the tumor, passing through skin and other tissue to reach it. radiation beam. This procedure may be an option if you are premenopausal and have the most common type of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma. Otherwise, your doctor may consider the use of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) after radiation therapy has completed. This approach used to be called hormone replacement therapy or HRT. Hormone therapy for menopause helps lessen some of the side effects of radiation-induced menopause. See Part 6: Survivorship for more information. Radiation therapy for cervical cancer can also have long-term and serious side effects on fertility, sexual health, and bowel and bladder function. What to expect A planning session, called simulation, is needed before EBRT begins. You will first be placed in the treatment position. You will be asked to lie on your back and stay very still.
2739	No special preparations need to be taken ahead of HRA. The procedure is brief (about 20 to 30 minutes), generally painless, and you can go home afterwards. Some people have minor bleeding and discomfort for a few days following the procedure. Sometimes HRA is done in the operating room under general anesthesia. SISCCA Superficially invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SISCCA) is the earliest form of anal cancer. These small lesions are often found accidentally. They may be found during a biopsy, or during removal of growths thought to be non-cancerous. Such growths may include genital warts, hemorrhoids, or anal skin tags. These cancers are tiny (less than 7 mm wide, smaller than a pea) and not deep at all. Treatment for SISCCA is evolving. If the lesion is completely removed during surgery, further treatment may not be needed. However, close follow-up that includes HRA and other testing to check for spread to nearby lymph nodes is needed. Most of the information in this guide does not apply to SISCCA. This guide applies to treatment of invasive anal cancer diagnosed by biopsy and found to be more advanced than SISCCA.
2740	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
2741	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
2742	Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the pictures and sophisticated computer software, the radiation team will plan the best radiation dose and number of treatments. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. Your radiation oncologist will devise a treatment plan to aim radiation beams at the anal tumor and lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin. You will be alone in the treatment room. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room. The technician will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. As treatment is given, you may hear noises. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Common side effects at the treatment site during the 5 to 6 weeks of radiation treatment include skin irritation, tenderness, redness, and sores or skin breakdown. Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist.
2743	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
2744	This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer. An example of when this happens is after organ transplantation. If you received an organ from another person, you likely take drugs to stop your body from attacking the donated organ. These drugs, called immunosuppressants, also reduce the body’s ability to fight infection and disease. The immune system also may not work well if you have other health conditions, such as: Lymphoma (cancer of the lymph nodes) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (cancer of white blood cells in bone marrow) Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS Any of these conditions can weaken the immune system, which can increase the risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. Everyone with this condition should undergo skin cancer screening on a regular basis. Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing.
2745	Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold. Skin has 3 layers: Epidermis is the outermost (top) layer of skin that provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis contains connective tissue, hair follicles, and sweat glands. Hypodermis (subcutis) is the deepest layer, made up of fat and connective tissue. Skin cancers are often formed in the epidermis. There are 3 main types of cells in the epidermis: Squamous cells: These cells are thin, flat cells that look like fish scales, and are found in the tissue that forms the surface of the skin. Basal cells: These cells are found in the lower part of the epidermis, called the basal cell layer. Basal cells constantly divide to form new cells to replace the squamous cells that wear off of the skin’s surface. As these cells move up in the epidermis, they get flatter, eventually becoming squamous cells. Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes.
2746	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
2747	Examine your breasts to look for lumps, nipple discharge or bleeding, or skin changes. h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Clinical breast exam Clinical breast exam (CBE) is a physical exam of the bare breast performed by a health care provider to check for lumps or other changes. It is done while you are seated and/or lying down. Your provider should take time to palpate (feel) the entire breast, including the armpit. A nurse or assistant might also be in the room during the exam. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (ie, blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records.
2748	 See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, it is called “regional” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 4 for more information on regional CSCC. Kno“wing there is treatment available gave me hope at diagnosis and for the future. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is most commonly caused by getting sunburns or spending too much time in the sun over many years. h An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin that has a higher chance of becoming squamous cell skin cancer. You may be more likely to get squamous cell skin cancer if you have actinic keratoses, a weakened immune system, or certain genetic syndromes. Squamous cell skin cancer can form in old wounds, burns, or scars. This is called Marjolin’s ulcer and it can be harder to treat. Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer.
2749	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
2750	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
2751	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
2752	If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy. 5 When treatment is over Skin exams by your doctor Prevention for patients at high-risk Steps you can take Key points You’ve finished treatment. Now you may be wondering if—or when—cancer might return. Because you’ve already had squamous cell skin cancer, you are at higher risk of getting it again. You’re also at higher risk of getting other types of skin cancer. This chapter explains how you can help prevent and detect future skin cancers. Skin exams by your doctor After finishing treatment, getting regular skin exams to monitor for the return of squamous cell skin cancer is very important. These followup exams should include a complete check of the skin on your entire body, as well as the lymph nodes closest to the cancer site. You will be asked to undress and put on a paper gown or drape. Undergarments can be worn during the exam. The gown will be adjusted to allow your doctor to see different areas.
2753	A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area. This may be done the same day or a few days after a PDEMA/Mohs procedure or standard surgical excision. After surgery, your skin will continue healing for a period of between 6 to 10 weeks. Scar treatment and aftercare for the skin around the wound will likely be recommended. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) is a type of cancer treatment that uses beams of intense energy – from electrons (beams), photons (high-energy x-rays), or protons (charged particles) -- to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy usually involves 5 daily brief treatments per week over 3 to 7 weeks. Radiation treatments should be given by a practicing radiation oncologist (a doctor who is an expert in radiation treatment). Types of radiation therapy There are two general types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat CSCC: external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) and brachytherapy. In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons.
2754	This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches. A wound might be left open (rather than being stitched together) and left to heal by itself, filling in and closing up naturally. This is called secondary intention healing. It could mean you will need regular dressings to the area for up to 6 weeks, but the full time to heal depends on the size, depth, and area of the wound. A linear closure is another common form of wound healing. The surgeon will cut a small amount of extra skin to change the shape of the wound from a circle to a fusiform (an oval that looks like a football) to help the surgeon stitch the wound together in a line. Other wounds may need skin grafts or other types of surgery (such as rearranging skin, known as “flapping”) to heal well and lessen scarring. A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area.
2755	Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks. Side effects The side effects of brachytherapy are similar to those of EBRT and include: h Skin irritation near treatment area Tiredness (fatigue) Soreness in your pelvic area Difficulty urinating or painful urination Softer bowel movements or diarrhea Increased vaginal discharge Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Most systemic therapies are given intravenously. This means they are slowly infused into your bloodstream through a vein. Infusions are often given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Chemotherapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. It stops the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Cisplatin is generally preferred for platinumbased chemotherapy.
2756	The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells. There are 2 types of bone marrow tests that are often done at the same time: Bone marrow aspirate Bone marrow biopsy A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are bedside procedures. They are not surgeries and do not require an operating room. Your care team will try to make you as comfortable as possible during the procedures. In some places, sedation or anesthesia is provided during these procedures. The samples are usually taken from the back of the hip bone (pelvis). You will likely lie on your belly or side. For an aspirate, a hollow needle will be pushed through your skin and into the bone. Liquid bone marrow will then be drawn into a syringe. For the biopsy, a wider needle will be used to remove a small piece of bone. You may feel bone pain at your hip for a few days. Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy.
2757	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions. 2 Testing for CBCL Test results General health tests Skin exam Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Immunophenotyping Testing for CBCL biomarker and genetic changes TNM scores Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat lymphomas of the skin. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Results from blood and tissue tests, imaging studies, and biopsy will determine your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Please wait to discuss the results with your doctor or health care team. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time.
2758	Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. For weeks my bra had been feeling uncomfortably tight. I tried to ignore it but then felt sharp, shooting pains and the skin looked 'funny.' It took multiple office visits and finally to a surgeon to learn I had inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). a nurse and didn't know you could have breast cancer without a lump." 2 Testing for IBC 20 21 21 23 24 25 Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Distress screening Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram.
2759	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
2760	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
2761	During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team.
2762	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
2763	Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar. Different methods can result in different types of scars. Talk to your doctor about the type of biopsy and the risk of scarring before you have the biopsy. No matter which type of biopsy is done, it should remove as much of the suspected area as possible for an accurate diagnosis to be made. Skin biopsies are done using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine), which is injected into the area with a very small needle. You will likely feel a small prick and a little stinging as the medicine is injected, but you should not feel any pain during the biopsy. Skin shave biopsy A skin shave biopsy can be done on the skin surface (superficial) or deeper. Superficial shave biopsies are useful for very flat skin lesions. This type of biopsy removes the top layer of skin (epidermis) and part of the dermis using a tool similar to a razor. Skin punch biopsy During a skin punch biopsy, a small piece of skin and connective tissue are removed using a hand-held tool. Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin.
2764	It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away. Possible signs of IBC: Peau d’orange (pitted or dimpled appearance of skin) Skin thickening (skin has an orange-peel texture) Edema (swelling caused by excess fluid in body tissue) Erythema (reddening of the skin, usually in patches) Inflammatory breast cancer In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. Like other breast cancers, IBC can happen in those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue.
2765	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
2766	For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it.
2767	T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor is more than 4 cm with DOI of more than or tumor invades nearby structures only, such as through the cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor has invaded the masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery. Regional lymph node There are hundreds of lymph nodes throughout your body. They work as filters to help fight infection and remove harmful things from your body. The head and neck contain a network of more than 300 nodes. They are bound together with muscles, nerves, and blood and lymph vessels. Head and neck cancers sometimes spread to neck lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes are found near the tumor. Cancer found in a regional lymph node is a lymph node metastasis. This is different than a distant metastasis, which is found outside the neck. When cancer has grown through and spreads outside of the lymph node, it is referred to as extranodal extension or extranodal extension-positive . About AML 5 What is AML? 5 What is blood? 7 What are blasts?
2768	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
2769	The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures. You may be able to go home the next day. Open biopsy Like a resection, an open biopsy is a surgical procedure that involves making a small opening in the skull (craniotomy). First, you’ll be given anesthesia that will let you sleep through the procedure. Your neurosurgeon will cut open a section of your scalp and then remove a piece of skull bone. Using small surgical knives and other special instruments, the neurosurgeon will carefully remove a piece or pieces of the tumor. The segment of skull bone will be replaced and the incision will be sewn up. Lab testing After either type of biopsy, the tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis. A specialist called a neuropathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope.
2770	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
2771	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
2772	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
2773	Although many people with primary CNS lymphoma have only one visible tumor, others have multiple tumors on their scan. Testing after diagnosis also checks for signs of cancer in the eyes, cerebrospinal fluid, blood, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and possibly the bone marrow and testicles. These tests include: Eye exam Your eyes are connected directly to the brain by the optic nerves. So primary CNS lymphoma doesn’t travel far to spread from the brain to the eyes. (Very rarely it starts in the eyes and spreads to the brain.) If lymphoma occurs in the eye, it often forms in the back of the eye, called the retina. The retina converts what you see into signals, which it sends through the optic nerves to the brain. Lymphoma cells can also invade the vitreous, the clear gel that fills the eye. When primary CNS lymphoma involves the eyes, it’s called vitreoretinal lymphoma. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye exam. This is done at an eye doctor’s office using a slit lamp, a microscope with a bright light. You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils.
2774	Many treatment options are available and should be discussed with your doctor at your first visit and as your condition is followed. These range from pills you take every day to a combination of IV infusions and pills taken for a specific amount of time. You may live for years without needing treatment. If or when someone needs treatment can vary greatly from person to person. You may have a more intense or aggressive treatment plan if you develop Richter transformation, which is described later. This rare condition can lead to a more aggressive cancer called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) or another cancer called Hodgkin lymphoma. Is there a cure for CLL? There is currently no cure for CLL, but you can get effective treatment so your blood cells will be mostly healthy ones and a full life is possible. This is a condition called minimal residual disease. We’ll describe this in a later chapter. While the goal of treatment is not to cure CLL, the goal is to prevent the disease from causing problems and from becoming life-threatening. What is SLL? Small lymphocytic lymphoma, or SLL, is the same cancer as CLL.
2775	Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade. The grade measures how aggressive the cancer is. It’s a rating of how fast the cancer will likely grow and spread. To figure out the grade, a sample of your tumor will be studied in a laboratory by a pathologist. The pathologist will compare the cancer cells to normal cells. The more different they look, the higher the grade. And the higher the grade, the faster the cancer is expected to spread. LG means that the cancer cells are low grade (slow growing). HG means that the cancer cells are high grade (fast growing). The inner lining of the bladder is made of urothelial cells. Most cases of bladder cancer start in the urothelial cells. So this type of cancer is called urothelial cancer. But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes.
2776	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
2777	Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy.
2778	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
2779	It can determine if you have a mutation in the BRCA genes, or in other genes that play a role in hereditary cancer. Nutritional and digestive tract health Your provider may ask about your diet and eating habits. Symptoms of ovarian cancer include bloating, pain in the pelvis or abdomen, difficulty eating, and feeling full quickly. These symptoms may cause you to eat less in general, or to eat foods lacking in nutrients. Your overall health and nutrition level can have an impact on the success of surgery and other treatment outcomes. If you need help planning healthy meals or have questions about your diet, ask your provider for a referral to a registered dietitian or nutritionist. Your doctor may want to check your gastrointestinal (GI) tract using an imaging test. The GI tract is made of the organs that food passes through when you eat. This includes your stomach, small bowel, and large bowel (rectum and colon). An imaging tool called a scope is used to examine these organs. A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel.
2780	Cancer cells crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Without enough normal cells, cancer cells can cause organs to stop working. Scientists have learned a great deal about cancer. As a result, today’s treatments work Small cell lung cancer cells appear small and blue when viewed with a microscope. better than treatments in the past. Also, many people with cancer have more than one treatment option. The two most common types of lung cancer are: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), further divided into: • Adenocarcinoma • Squamous cell carcinoma • Adenosquamous carcinoma • Large cell carcinoma • Sarcomatoid carcinoma Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), further divided into: • Small cell carcinoma • Combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinoma The names of the cancers refer to their appearance under a microscope. When viewed with a microscope, SCLCs appear small and blue. Sometimes lung tumors contain both small cell and non-small cell lung cancer cells. These are called combined (small and non-small) cell lung carcinomas and are usually treated like small cell lung cancer. SCLC is much less common than NSCLC. It is the focus of this book.
2781	Risk factors Risk is your chance of developing lung cancer. Everyone has some risk for developing lung cancer. However, some people are at increased risk. Risk factors can be activities that people do, things in the environment, or traits passed down from biological parents to children through genes. Genes are a set of instructions that tell new cells what to become (for example, lung, heart, and skin) and what to do (make hormones, absorb nutrients, and kill germs). Known risk factors for lung cancer are listed in Guide Lung cancer basics What is lung cancer? What are the causes and risk factors? What are the symptoms of SCLC? What's the treatment for SCLC? Key points Small cell lung cancer forms from cells that line the inner airways of the lungs. It’s a cancer that can be aggressive and grows fast. This chapter gives you the basics of small cell lung cancer. What is lung cancer? The lungs are the main organs of the respiratory system. They deliver oxygen to the blood and remove carbon dioxide from the blood. The transfer of these gases in and out of the body is called respiration.
2782	This is known as surveillance. The information that follows applies to surveillance for common types of cervical cancer and for small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC). Physical exams Physical exams performed by your oncologist are an important part of surveillance, especially in the first 5 years after treatment. At these follow-up visits, tell your doctor about any changes in your health. Such changes include new or worsening symptoms and other health conditions or concerns. The recommended time frames for these follow-up visits are as follows: Years 1 and 2: Every 3 to 6 months Years 3, 4, and 5: Every 6 to 12 months After year 5: Once a year or as agreed upon with your doctor Time frame ranges are used to allow for differences in individual risk of recurrence and in patient and provider preference. Those considered at higher risk of recurrence may benefit from more frequent exams than those with a lower risk. After the fifth year, visits are generally spaced out to once per year. Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence.
2783	The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach. After being broken down into a liquid, food enters the small intestine. The large intestine prepares unused food to be moved out of the body. Parts of the esophagus Esophagus wall The esophagus wall contains 4 layers: Mucosa – inner membrane that is in contact with food. It has 3 parts: Epithelium – innermost lining and is normally made up of flat, thin cells called squamous cells Lamina propria – thin layer of connective tissue under the epithelium Muscularis mucosa - very thin layer of muscle under the lamina propria Submucosa – layer of connective tissue just below the mucosa that contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. In some parts of the esophagus, this layer also includes glands that secrete mucus. Muscularis propria – thick layer of muscle under the submucosa. It contracts in a coordinated way to push food down the esophagus from the throat to the stomach (peristalsis). Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle.
2784	Tests of lymph nodes will also confirm small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL). An excisional biopsy is when a whole lymph node is removed by a surgeon, while an incisional biopsy removes only part of a lymph node. There are many lymph nodes throughout your body, so if you have a lymph node removed, you won’t lose your ability to fight infections and disease. Needle biopsies take a small sample of a lymph node using a needle. They can be done when other biopsies are not safe to perform. A lab test will be used to find the immunophenotype of the biopsied cells. A bone marrow biopsy removes a core sample of marrow. A bone marrow aspiration removes liquid and cells from the marrow. These procedures are usually done at the same time. They’re performed on the back of the hip bone. You may receive an injected pain blocker or light sedative to help you relax. Tests of bone marrow aren’t usually needed for diagnosis, so you might not get one. How is treatment planned? Lab results used for diagnosis are included in a report. This report will be sent to your hematologist-oncologist, an expert in blood cancers.
2785	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2786	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
2787	Signs and symptoms Basal cell skin cancer can happen to anyone but it’s most common in people with lighter skin, lighter hair, or lighter eyes. In lighter skin, its lesions can look like any of the following: h Flat, pale or yellow areas, like a scar h Red patches that might be itchy Small, pink or red, shiny bumps that may have blue, brown, or black areas Open sores that don’t heal and might bleed, or go away and come back In darker (brown and black) skin, basal cell skin cancer can appear as a brown or glossy black bump with a rolled border. It can be mistaken for a normal mole. Be sure to look out for any new, changing, bleeding, or unusual skin growths. Skin cancer is easier to cure when it is caught early. To find out how basal cell skin cancer is diagnosed, read Chapter 2: Testing for basal cell skin cancer. Causes and risk factors Basal cell skin cancer is caused by exposure to UV radiation from the sun or other sources like tanning beds. UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function.
2788	Curettage and electrodesiccation C&E or shave excision are recommended treatment options for low-risk, local CSCC. Usually it is considered for early, small CSCC on the surface of the skin. If the tumor ends up being deeper than expected into the skin during the procedure, a standard surgical or shave excision should be performed rather than C&E to remove deep areas of cancerous tissue. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is a recommended treatment option for low-risk, local CSCC. If testing after surgery finds cancer cells in the surrounding tissue removed with the tumor, more treatment is needed. Further treatment options include: Mohs surgery or resection with PDEMA Another surgical excision Radiation therapy (if more surgery cannot be done) Mohs surgery or PDEMA Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is a recommended treatment option for low-risk CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes.  See Part 2: Types of treatment for more detailed descriptions of these treatments. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit If you smoke tobacco or use e-cigarettes, it is very important to quit. Smoking can limit how well cancer treatment works.
2789	Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes. In addition to providing color, melanin also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the chances of getting a disease. For example, smoking cigarettes is a risk factor for developing lung cancer. The major risk factors for squamous cell skin cancer are described next. Sunlight/outdoor tanning Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over the course of many years, especially in people who sunburn easily. People with light skin, hair, and eyes who have been in the sun very often throughout their lives are at the highest risk for squamous cell skin cancer. People who work outdoors are also at higher risk. Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun.
2790	Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle. Striated muscle generates force and contracts. It is under your control (voluntary). Middle esophagus The middle part of the esophagus is a mixture of striated and smooth muscle. Lower esophagus The lower part of the esophagus consists only of smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is not under your control. It is involuntary, like a reflex. Esophagogastric junction The esophagogastric junction (EGJ) is the place where the stomach and the esophagus meet, found just beneath the diaphragm. It is also called the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). It separates the contents of the esophagus from the contents of the stomach (acid). Esophageal cancer Cancer of the esophagus (or esophageal cancer) starts when cells in the epithelium of the esophagus begin to grow out of control. There are 2 types of esophageal cancer: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well.
2791	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
2792	While one goal of treatment is to control cancer, that should be balanced with the other goal of treatment: maintaining quality of life. For older patients who have other diseases or conditions and aren’t able to fully perform ordinary daily activities, supportive care by itself may be a reasonable option. What’s next? Now that you’ve been introduced to the various treatment options for primary CNS lymphoma, the first step toward treatment is to come up with the best possible treatment plan. This plan involves a number of different health care providers. Multidisciplinary care During the course of your diagnosis and treatment, you’ll be cared for by numerous doctors, specialists, and allied health providers. These may include a neuro-oncologist, neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, pathologist, ophthalmologist, nurses, primary care doctor, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, palliative care specialist, pain specialist, psychologist, social workers, nutritionist, and rehabilitation specialists like physical, occupational, and speech therapists. When all these providers are working and communicating as a team to help you, it’s called multidisciplinary care. It’s helpful to understand the role that each team member plays. Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team.
2793	Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care providers. Some of your clinic visits may be done by a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Oncology pharmacists are experts in knowing how to use medicines to treat cancer and to manage symptoms and side effects. Palliative care nurses, advanced practice providers (APPs), and physicians help provide an extra layer of support with cancer-related care. Radiation therapists provide your hands-on delivery of radiotherapy treatments. Nutritionists and dietitians can provide guidance on what foods are most suitable for your condition. Psychologists and psychiatrists are mental health experts who can help manage issues such as depression, anxiety, or other mental health conditions that can affect how you think and feel. Social workers help people solve and cope with problems in their everyday lives. Clinical social workers also diagnose and treat mental, behavioral, and emotional issues. The anxiety a person feels when diagnosed with cancer might be managed by a social worker in some cancer centers. They, or other designated professionals, can help navigate the complexities of financial and insurance stresses.
2794	Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET-CT scan. It may be done with one or two machines depending on the cancer center. Sodium fluoride PET-CT A sodium fluoride PET-CT might be used instead of a bone scan. In this test, the radiotracer is made of sodium fluoride. FDG PET-CT An FDG PET-CT uses a radiotracer called F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET-CT may not be needed. FDG PET-CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis.
2795	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
2796	What are the symptoms? Does the staff on hand know how to manage hypersensitivity reactions? Will the right medical equipment be available in case I have an allergic reaction? Biomarker-based treatment If the cancer has any of the biomarkers listed in Guide 3 below, targeted therapy or immunotherapy may be an option. For information on the side effects of immunotherapy, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer basics The throat The pharynx Head and neck cancers Throat cancer Key points The throat is located in the back of the mouth and in the neck. Cancer can form in part of the throat called the oropharynx. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and the base of the tongue. The throat The throat is a hollow, muscular tube inside the neck that starts behind the nose and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and esophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach).
2797	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
2798	This chapter presents an overview of bone cancer. What is bone cancer? Cancers that start in the bone are called primary bone cancers. Bone cancers that start in another part of the body (such as the breast, lungs, or kidney) and travel to the bones are called secondary bone malignancies or metastatic cancer. Metastatic cancers to bone behave very differently from primary bone cancers. Sarcomas Most primary bone cancers are sarcomas. Sarcomas are a rare group of cancers. There are 2 main types of sarcomas: Soft tissue sarcomas Bone sarcomas Soft tissue includes fat, muscles, nerves, tendons, blood and lymph vessels, and other supportive tissues of the body. Soft tissue sarcomas are more common than bone sarcomas. Bone sarcomas, such as osteosarcomas, start in the cells that form NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Bone Cancer, 2025 bone. Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are the most common types of bone cancer, except multiple myeloma. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Soft Tissue Sarcoma and NCCN Guidelines for Patients®: Multiple Myeloma at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Types of bone tumors A bone tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within a bone.
2799	Imaging Imaging tests take pictures (images) of the insides of your body. The images show areas in the body that might have cancer. The images can reveal a lymphoma’s location, size, and other features. MRI Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most useful imaging technique for identifying primary CNS lymphoma. An MRI scan is good at showing the spine and soft tissues, including the brain, as well as other details that are helpful for planning surgery. MRI uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of the inside of the body. During an MRI, you’ll lie on a table that slides into the scanning machine. (An open MRI scanner may be an option at some health care centers.) It’s important to lie still during the test to get the best pictures. The machine makes loud noises but you can wear earplugs. An MRI of the brain or spinal cord usually requires a contrast agent (also called contrast dye or just contrast). Contrast highlights areas in organs, blood vessels, or other tissues to make them easier to see.
2800	Mutations can be passed down in families, in which case they occur in every cell in your body. Or mutations can occur spontaneously in just some of your cells. In other words, they may be present before you’re born (called an inherited or germline mutation) or occur on their own later in life (called an acquired or somatic mutation). The two basic types of genetic tests used for prostate cancer care are germline testing and molecular biomarker testing: Germline testing Sometimes, mutations in genes inherited from your parents can increase the risk of different cancers. You can pass these genes on to your children. Other family members might also carry these mutations. If you have a family history of cancer, your doctor might suggest genetic germline testing to find out if you have an inherited cancer risk. The goal of this type of genetic testing is to look for germline (inherited) mutations that occur in every cell in your body. Genetic germline testing is done using a sample of your blood, urine, or saliva. For prostate cancer, germline testing looks for characteristic changes in these genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PALB2, PMS2, and others.
2801	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
2802	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2803	There are more than 50 compounds in tobacco smoke known to cause cancer. The risk grows the more times a person smokes and the longer they smoke. Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of lung cancer. Secondhand smoke is the smoke exhaled by another person and the smoke from the burning end of tobacco products. Researchers are studying ways to prevent lung cancer caused by smoking. Treatments to prevent cancer are called chemopreventive agents. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial on preventing lung cancer that you could join. Cancer-causing agents You are more likely to get lung cancer, especially if you smoke, after exposure to: Radon Asbestos Arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, and nickel Coal smoke, soot, silica, and diesel fumes Air pollution by fine particulates, ozone, nitrogen oxides, and sulfur dioxide Lung cancer screening basics The lungs Lung cancer Early detection Key points Lung cancer starts in the cells of the lungs. For those at risk of developing lung cancer, regular screening can help find lung cancer at its earliest, most treatable stages. The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest.
2804	Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) might be used in combination with daunorubicin and cytarabine to treat AML with CBF or other genetic abnormalities. FLT3 Gilteritinib, quizartinib, midostaurin, or sorafenib is used to treat AML with certain FLT3 mutations such as FLT3-ITD and FLT3- TKD. Sorafenib or quizartinib is used to treat AML with an FLT3-ITD mutation. Guide 2 Targeted therapy examples Ovarian cancer basics The ovaries Types of ovarian cancer Cancer care plan Key points Most ovarian cancers are found in the surface layer of tissue surrounding the ovaries, called the epithelium. These cancers can also start in the fallopian tube, close to where the tube meets the ovary. This guide provides treatment recommendations for common and rare ovarian cancers. The ovaries The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. In addition to the 2 ovaries, this system includes the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. The ovaries make eggs needed for sexual reproduction. They also release hormones that affect breast growth, body shape, and the menstrual cycle (periods). Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right.
2805	Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks. Side effects The side effects of brachytherapy are similar to those of EBRT and include: h Skin irritation near treatment area Tiredness (fatigue) Soreness in your pelvic area Difficulty urinating or painful urination Softer bowel movements or diarrhea Increased vaginal discharge Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Most systemic therapies are given intravenously. This means they are slowly infused into your bloodstream through a vein. Infusions are often given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Chemotherapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. It stops the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Cisplatin is generally preferred for platinumbased chemotherapy.
2806	Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan. Using the pictures and sophisticated computer software, the radiation team will plan the best radiation dose and number of treatments. During treatment, you will lie on a table as you did for simulation. Devices may be used to keep you from moving. This helps to target the tumor. Ink marks on your skin will help position your body accurately for daily treatments. Your radiation oncologist will devise a treatment plan to aim radiation beams at the anal tumor and lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin. You will be alone in the treatment room. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room. The technician will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. As treatment is given, you may hear noises. You will not see, hear, or feel the radiation. One session can take less than 10 minutes. Common side effects at the treatment site during the 5 to 6 weeks of radiation treatment include skin irritation, tenderness, redness, and sores or skin breakdown. Discuss the use of over-the-counter ointments with your radiation oncologist.
2807	If available, enrolling in a clinical trial for treatment is encouraged. If anal cancer metastasizes, it spreads most often to the liver or lungs. Metastatic anal cancer is treated first with platinum-based chemotherapy. This is called first-line therapy. Options recommended at this time include: Carboplatin and paclitaxel 5-FU, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) 5-FU, leucovorin, and cisplatin (FOLFCIS) Modified docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil (DCF) h 5-FU and cisplatin Ask your treatment team to explain: How often you need to receive chemotherapy How long you need to receive chemotherapy How chemotherapy treatment will be given (eg, intravenously, orally, infusion pump) After chemotherapy with certain regimens, treatment with chemoradiation may be given. The extent of the cancer will be re-checked when you have finished chemotherapy. This will help guide decisions about chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is generally not considered after chemotherapy with the modified DCF (docetaxel, cisplatin, fluorouracil) regimen. If chemoradiation is planned, either 5-FU or capecitabine will be used for the chemotherapy portion. Side effects of chemotherapy The most common side effects of the chemotherapy regimens discussed above are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hair loss, and sores in the mouth and lining of the anus.
2808	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
2809	Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger.
2810	Key points A biopsy is the main test to diagnose primary CNS lymphoma. Imaging tests take pictures that show areas in the body that might have cancer as well as the extent of the disease. A biopsy is a procedure that removes a small piece of a tumor, which is tested for cancer cells. The standard biopsy method for diagnosing primary CNS lymphoma is a stereotactic biopsy. A stereotactic biopsy is a precise technique that’s used when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. After primary CNS lymphoma is diagnosed, more tests are needed to find out how far the cancer has grown and if it has spread to any other area of the body. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination to look for lymphoma in the eyes. A lumbar puncture is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid, which is tested for cancer cells. HIV that’s related to primary CNS lymphoma requires specialized therapy in addition to cancer treatment. So everyone with primary CNS lymphoma needs to have an HIV blood test.
2811	Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. An exam of the throat (pharynx) may sometimes involve the use of a thin, tubeshaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. A sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins can be targeted with specific therapies. HPV testing by is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. Let us know what you think!
2812	Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors. Abdominal and pelvic exam Your provider will feel different areas of your belly. This is called an abdominal exam. They are checking to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Your doctor will also feel for signs of fluid buildup (ascites) in the belly area or around the ovaries. Your provider will also feel for abnormal changes in the size, shape, or position of your ovaries, cervix, and uterus. This is called a pelvic exam. A widening instrument, called a speculum, is used to view your vagina and cervix. A sample of cells may be removed for testing. This is known as a Pap test. It is used to detect cervical cancer or pre-cancer, not ovarian cancer. Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer.
2813	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
2814	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
2815	They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietitian can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
2816	Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs.
2817	Fertility and family planning For unknown reasons, colorectal cancer is being diagnosed more often in young adults. Some cancer treatments make it hard or impossible to have children. Radiation therapy, for example, is used to treat many rectal cancers. Radiation damages the hormonemaking function of the ovaries and testicles. This can cause the inability to conceive a child. Damage to the ovaries is known as premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or radiation-induced premature menopause. See the Survivorship chapter of this guide for more information on this side effect. If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team. Your doctor will discuss any fertility-related risks of your treatment plan with you. You may be referred for counseling about your fertility preservation options. Some are described next. Sperm banking Sperm banking stores semen for later use by freezing it in liquid nitrogen. The medical term for this is semen cryopreservation. Egg freezing Like sperm banking, unfertilized eggs can be removed, frozen, and stored for later use. The medical term for this is oocyte cryopreservation.
2818	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
2819	Esophageal cancer starts when abnormal cells grow out of control in the layers of the esophagus inner lining. The esophagus The esophagus is located behind the trachea (windpipe) and in front of the spine. It is part of the digestive system. The digestive system transports and breaks down food, absorbs nutrients, and removes waste from the body. It includes the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, small intestine, colon, rectum, and anus. Food and drink enter the mouth and move through the esophagus into the stomach. When you swallow, small contractions, called peristalsis, along with gravity and pressure, move food down the esophagus and into the stomach. Except during the act of swallowing, the esophagus is normally empty. The esophagus is about 10 inches long and about 1 inch wide. It has two sphincters, circular muscles that normally remain closed except during the act of swallowing. One sphincter is located at the top of the esophagus and the other at the bottom, between the esophagus and the stomach. The digestive tract The digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is part of the digestive system. Food enters the mouth and passes through the esophagus into the stomach.
2820	Local excision Local excision is a recommended treatment option for some stage I and stage IIA perianal cancers. Stage I and II anal cancers have not invaded nearby lymph nodes. See page 13 for more information on cancer staging. For local excision to be an option, the cancer must not have invaded the sphincter muscle. The cancer grade is also important when determining if local excision is an option. The cancer grade is a rating of how fast the cancer is expected to grow and spread. It is based on how abnormal the cancer cells look when viewed under a microscope. Higher scores mean that the cancer is likely to grow and spread quickly. There are 5 possible grades: GX: Grade cannot be assessed (undetermined grade) G1: Well differentiated (low grade) G2: Moderately differentiated (intermediate grade) G3: Poorly differentiated (high grade) G4: Undifferentiated (high grade) Local excision should only be considered for low-grade (G1) and intermediate-grade (G2) perianal cancers. The normal tissue surrounding the lesion removed during surgery is called the surgical margin. If a margin of at least 1 cm is removed and it does not contain cancer cells, no further treatment is needed. The cancer will be observed.
2821	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
2822	Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin. It rarely spreads to the lining of the brain and spinal cord. Imaging tests can also show areas of infection or bleeding that may impact your care. A radiologist, a medical expert in interpreting imaging tests, will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You will likely not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is a substance used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. Contrast might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). Oral contrast does not get absorbed from your intestines and will be passed with your next bowel movements. IV contrast will leave the body in the urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do.
2823	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
2824	If your doctor says something you do not understand, let them know 'I don’t fully understand what this means' or 'I don’t fully understand what you just said. Can you please explain it in simpler terms?' This is an important way of advocating for yourself." Lumbar puncture Leukemia can travel to the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. This may cause symptoms such as headaches, neck pain, and sensitivity to light. A test may be needed to know if leukemia cells are in your spinal fluid. A lumbar puncture (LP) is a procedure that removes spinal fluid by inserting a needle into the middle of the lower back. It is also called a spinal tap. Key points In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), abnormal changes stop very immature white blood cells called myeloid blasts or myeloblasts from becoming mature blood cells. As a result, there is a buildup of blasts in the bone marrow and blood making it hard for blood to do its work. An aspirate or biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue or group of cells for testing. A diagnosis of AML is confirmed using a bone marrow aspirate and bone marrow biopsy.
2825	Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book. Cancer cells form a tumor called a primary tumor within the area of the oropharynx. This area includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue. Tumors can grow into nearby tissue and organs, such as the voice box (larynx). Cancer cells often spread to lymph nodes in the neck, and less frequently, the lungs, liver, or spine. Key points Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). SCC of the throat (oropharynx) is the focus of this book.
2826	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
2827	Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells (lymphocytes) throughout the body. It is also called lymphatic fluid. Lymph nodes While lymph travels throughout your body in lymphatic vessels, it passes through hundreds of small bean-shaped structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Lymph nodes can’t usually be seen or felt. The highest numbers of lymph nodes are found in the neck, groin, and armpits. Spleen The spleen is the largest organ of the lymphatic system. It is about 4 inches long and shaped like a fist. It makes lymphocytes and plays an important role in blood filtration and storage. Lymphatic system There are hundreds of small bean-shaped structures, called lymph nodes, throughout the human body. They catch and filter out foreign particles and harmful cells, including cancer cells. Bone marrow Most bones have soft, spongy tissue in the center called bone marrow. This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest.
2828	Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
2829	In this method, a doctor uses a wide needle to remove a sample of tissue from a lymph node, but doesn’t remove the entire node. Guide 1 Testing for Hodgkin lymphoma A thin, moist layer of cells that covers the inside of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Lamina propria A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium. Muscle (muscularis) A type of soft tissue. Perimuscular fibrous tissue A type of connective tissue that surrounds muscle. Serosa An outer membrane that covers the gallbladder and bile ducts. The serosa is also called the serous membrane or visceral peritoneum. Bile duct cancer stages A bile duct is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are muscle and connective tissue. Cancer stages for intrahepatic bile duct cancer can be found in Guide T = Tumor The primary tumor size can be measured in centimeters (cm) or millimeters (mm). Cancer can grow or spread into nearby blood vessels, the liver, or structures outside the liver.
2830	h A sentinel lymph node (SLN) is the first lymph node(s) that cancer cells are most likely to spread to from a primary tumor. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB) might be done to look for cancer in your lymph node(s). Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Testing takes time. It might take days or weeks before all test results come in. 3 Breast cancer staging How breast cancer is staged TNM scores Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. It also takes into account hormone receptor and HER2 status. Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. At diagnosis, IBC is stage 3 or 4 disease. In stage 3, the tumor can be any size and in the lymph nodes, the lymph nodes can be fixed (or not moveable), or the cancer can involve the skin or chest wall.
2831	Longterm risks of not having enough estrogen include cardiovascular disease and bone loss (osteoporosis). If hysterectomy is being considered, ask your doctor if keeping your ovaries is appropriate. Lymph node dissection Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph. Lymph is a clear fluid that carries infection-fighting white blood cells. Lymph nodes are bean-shaped glands found throughout the body. They contain immune cells that help the body fight infection and disease. During surgery for cervical cancer, lymph nodes may be removed in order to be tested for cancer. This is called lymph node dissection or lymphadenectomy. In order to identify and remove the lymph node(s) most likely to contain cancer, a sentinel lymph node biopsy may be performed. This involves injecting a special dye or a radioactive substance into the cervix near the cancer. Lymph nodes containing the dye or substance can be seen using a special camera. These are the sentinel nodes. They are removed and tested for cancer. Testing the removed nodes helps determine the extent (spread) of the cancer. Removing lymph nodes can also help limit the spread of cancer cells through lymph. The closest lymph nodes to the cervix are the pelvic nodes.
2832	Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on invasive breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast and then spreads into surrounding tissue. Invasive breast cancer has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes. It is possible to have MBC when axillary lymph nodes do not have cancer.
2833	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
2834	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
2835	Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? Early and locally advanced lung cancers have not spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs. The difference between early and locally advanced cancer is mainly based on the cancer stage. Cancer stages 1, 2, and 3 A cancer stage describes the extent of lung cancer in the body. The main stages of NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Early and Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 2024 Cancers that have spread to the lungs are not lung cancers. For example, stomach cancer that has spread to the lungs is still stomach cancer. lung cancer are often written with Roman numerals—stages I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). We will be listing stages as 1, 2, 3, and 4 to make the stages easier to read. At diagnosis, stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 cancers have grown from the airway into lung tissue. Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced.
2836	Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? Early and locally advanced lung cancers have not spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs. The difference between early and locally advanced cancer is mainly based on the cancer stage. Cancer stages 1, 2, and 3 A cancer stage describes the extent of lung cancer in the body. The main stages of NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Early and Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 2024 Cancers that have spread to the lungs are not lung cancers. For example, stomach cancer that has spread to the lungs is still stomach cancer. lung cancer are often written with Roman numerals—stages I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). We will be listing stages as 1, 2, 3, and 4 to make the stages easier to read. At diagnosis, stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 cancers have grown from the airway into lung tissue. Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced.
2837	The stage describes how far the cancer has likely spread based on imaging and other testing. A risk factor that guides treatment for cervical cancer is lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI). LVSI means that there are tumor cells in the blood vessels or lymph vessels inside the tumor. Cancers with LVSI are more likely to spread to nearby lymph nodes. Nearby lymph nodes are more likely to be removed. Fertility-sparing treatment Surgical treatment for early-stage cervical cancer often involves surgery that removes the uterus (hysterectomy). Carrying a pregnancy is not possible after a hysterectomy. If the cancer has not spread beyond the cervix (stage 1), fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. If fertility-sparing treatment is being considered, ask your doctor about getting the opinion of a reproductive endocrinologist. Reproductive endocrinologists are doctors that specialize in fertility. A fertility-sparing approach is not appropriate for some uncommon types of cervical cancer. Stage 1A1 Cone biopsy is recommended for stage 1A1 cancers without known LVSI. If the results are good, no further treatment is needed.
2838	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
2839	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
2840	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
2841	Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). SCC of the throat (oropharynx) is the focus of this book. The oropharynx includes the back of the roof of the mouth (soft palate), the tonsils, the side and back walls of throat, and base of the tongue found in the throat. 2 Testing for throat cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment p16 (HPV) testing Imaging tests Scoping procedures Biopsy Biomarker testing Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Online patient portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. Keep these things in mind: Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment.
2842	Diagnosis If you have an area of abnormal-looking skin (called a lesion) that looks like it could be skin cancer, the next step is testing. This will likely include: h A full health history A close examination of the lesion(s) A skin biopsy to remove a sample of the lesion and test it for cancer (this is the only way to know for sure if there’s cancer) Imaging scans if cancer may be deep within the skin or spread to other parts of the body Biopsy If a concerning lesion is found on your skin, some or all of it will be removed and sent to a lab to be looked at under a microscope. This is called a skin biopsy. A biopsy is needed to diagnose squamous cell skin cancer. Your sample should be reviewed by a pathologist. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of your cells. There are several ways to do a skin biopsy. Your doctor will choose one based on the size of the affected area, where it is on your body, and other factors. Any biopsy is likely to leave at least a small scar.
2843	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
2844	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
2845	Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold. Skin has 3 layers: Epidermis is the outermost (top) layer of skin that provides a waterproof barrier and creates skin color (melanin). Dermis contains connective tissue, hair follicles, and sweat glands. Hypodermis (subcutis) is the deepest layer, made up of fat and connective tissue. Skin cancers are often formed in the epidermis. There are 3 main types of cells in the epidermis: Squamous cells: These cells are thin, flat cells that look like fish scales, and are found in the tissue that forms the surface of the skin. Basal cells: These cells are found in the lower part of the epidermis, called the basal cell layer. Basal cells constantly divide to form new cells to replace the squamous cells that wear off of the skin’s surface. As these cells move up in the epidermis, they get flatter, eventually becoming squamous cells. Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes.
2846	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
2847	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
2848	A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to help see cancer cells in the body. PET scans are performed about an hour after the tracer is injected. PET scans are combined with CT or MRI scans (PET/CT or PET/MRI) to determine where the cancer cells are located. This combined test is considered to be more accurate than either scan alone. Types of PET scans that can be helpful for those with adrenal tumors include FDG-PET and SSTRPET. FDG-PET/CT scan An FDG-PET scan uses a radioactive type of sugar (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) as its tracer. Active cancer cells use sugar faster than normal cells. This will make the cells look brighter in pictures. Many adrenal tumors are not fast-growing and not very bright on FDG-PET scans. FDG-PET scans can help determine if neuroendocrine tumors are becoming more aggressive. SSTR-PET/CT scan A somatostatin receptor (SSTR) antagonist is a protein found on the surface of cells that bind to a hormone called somatostatin. Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs.
2849	Somatostatin helps to control other hormones in the body. SSTRs are found on many different types of cells. A SSTR-PET uses a tracer that binds to these SSTRs. Blood tests Blood tests are used to look for signs of hormone secretion or to see how well you are responding to certain treatments. Biochemical tests Biochemical tests measure substances like hormones in blood, urine, and/or saliva that may be made by the adrenal tumor. Symptoms may be seen when your body makes too much of a hormone. Your doctor may consider these tests if you may have an adrenal tumor or syndromes caused by a tumor. More information on biochemical tests can be found in Guide Guide 1 Biochemical tests Squamous cell skin cancer basics 5 Skin basics 6 Risk factors 8 Diagnosis 11 Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is a common skin cancer, especially in fair-skinned people. It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive.
2850	Be prepared to talk about any illness or injury you’ve had and when it happened. Also tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some of these (such as saw palmetto or St. John’s wort) can cause changes in your PSA level, so your doctor needs to know if you’re taking them. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. It’s important to ask members from both sides of your family about all cancers, not just prostate cancer. Ask family members about other health issues like heart disease and diabetes, at what age they were diagnosed, and if anyone died from cancer. Share this information and any changes to your family history with your care team. Symptoms and quality of life Your doctor or another member of your care team will ask you a series of questions about what symptoms you may have (such as peeing frequently, difficulty peeing or pooping, or sexual problems).
2851	These pre-cancerous lesions are known as anal dysplasia. Identifying and treating anal dysplasia may prevent anal cancer. Other names for anal dysplasia include: Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) (mild dysplasia) High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) (moderate or severe dysplasia) Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) Stage 0 anal cancer The HPV vaccine A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available. While previously only recommended for routine use in adolescents and young adults, vaccination is now an option for adults aged 45 years and under. However, it is most effective in younger people because they have likely never been exposed to HPV. Also, while the vaccine can prevent new HPV infections, it does not treat existing HPV infections or HPV-related cancers. Diagnosis and treatment planning The most common symptom of anal cancer is bleeding from the anus, also called rectal bleeding. You may notice blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the water of the toilet bowl. Anal itching is also common. Some people have pain in the anal area or feel like there is a lump or mass near the anus. These symptoms should not be ignored.
2852	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2853	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment.
2854	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment.
2855	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2856	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2857	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2858	Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). For stage 3 disease, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) may be used during ICS. HIPEC is a technique in which chemotherapy is warmed and then circulated in the spaces between the organs of the abdomen during surgery. If cancer improves after several cycles of chemotherapy, surgery is usually recommended. If cancer stays the same, your doctor may recommend proceeding with surgery or continuing chemotherapy to see if there is improvement. After surgery, more chemotherapy is usually given. Maintenance therapy may follow once your cancer is in remission. Staging The information gained during surgery and surgical staging is used to determine the pathologic (post-surgery) stage. The pathologic stage provides the most accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread. It is used to guide treatment after surgery. A staging system is a standard way of describing the extent of cancer in the body. There are 2 staging systems for ovarian cancer. One was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the other by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO). They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often.
2859	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
2860	It may also have spread to lymph nodes and organs nearby (in the pelvis). Stage 3 has two subgroups: Stage 3A bladder cancer may only be in the fatty tissue surrounding the bladder or it may have spread to a single nearby lymph node. It may also invade nearby reproductive organs such as the prostate gland, uterus, or vagina. Stage 3A cancer has not spread to nodes or organs that are far from the bladder. Stage 3B has the same traits as stage 3A but has spread to multiple lymph nodes in the pelvis. Stage 3B cancer has not spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 Stage 4 cancer has grown through the bladder wall and may have spread to lymph nodes or organs far from the bladder. Stage 4 has two subgroups: Stage 4A has invaded the wall of the pelvis or abdomen. Or, it has spread to lymph nodes far from the bladder. Stage 4B has spread to far away lymph nodes and organs like the bones, liver, or lungs. Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade.
2861	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
2862	It is sometimes called advanced disease. In stage 4, cancer has spread to other parts of the body (metastasized). How breast cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade and the status of the biomarkers such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR). Prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic.
2863	Surgery performed after chemotherapy is called interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). For stage 3 disease, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) may be used during ICS. HIPEC is a technique in which chemotherapy is warmed and then circulated in the spaces between the organs of the abdomen during surgery. If cancer improves after several cycles of chemotherapy, surgery is usually recommended. If cancer stays the same, your doctor may recommend proceeding with surgery or continuing chemotherapy to see if there is improvement. After surgery, more chemotherapy is usually given. Maintenance therapy may follow once your cancer is in remission. Staging The information gained during surgery and surgical staging is used to determine the pathologic (post-surgery) stage. The pathologic stage provides the most accurate picture of how far the cancer has spread. It is used to guide treatment after surgery. A staging system is a standard way of describing the extent of cancer in the body. There are 2 staging systems for ovarian cancer. One was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the other by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO). They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often.
2864	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
2865	Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is the standard of care for treating AML. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and normal cells. Standard of care is the best-known way to treat a particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care. Ask your care team what treatment options are available and if a clinical trial might be right for you. Chemotherapy is most often a liquid that is slowly injected into a vein with a needle. The final dose differs between people because it is based on body weight. In most cases, chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows the body to recover before the next cycle. Cycles vary in length depending on which chemotherapy is used. You might spend time in the hospital during treatment. Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen.
2866	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
2867	All of this information is also provided in an informed consent form. Read the form carefully and ask questions before signing it. Take time to discuss it with family, friends, or others you trust. Keep in mind that you can leave and seek treatment outside of the clinical trial at any time. Start the conversation Don’t wait for your doctor to bring up clinical trials. Start the conversation and learn about all of your treatment options. If you find a study that you may be eligible for, ask your treatment team if you meet the requirements. If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment.
2868	This is why trimodal therapy is referred to as a "bladder preserving" treatment. Clinical trials Therapy may also be given as part of a clinical trial. A clinical trial is a type of medical research study and a vital way to assess new treatment methods. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If a new drug, device, or treatment approach is found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, it may be approved by the FDA. Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of their treatment options, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk with your care team about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful. Phase 2 trials study how well the drug or approach works against a specific type of cancer. Phase 3 trials test the drug or approach against a standard treatment.
2869	Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take. AJCC is just one type of staging system. Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes or mutations that might suggest treatment? Staging is based on a combination of information to reach a final numbered stage. Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches.
2870	Stem cell rescue can be an intense procedure. It’s not for everyone with primary CNS lymphoma. And it’s only used after you’ve had other treatments or if the lymphoma comes back after earlier treatment (relapse). Your treatment team will consider many factors to decide if a stem cell rescue is right for you. Some of these factors include your fitness level, health status, organ function, cancer stage, previous treatments, other medical conditions, available supportive care, and High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue First, stem cells are removed (harvested) from the patient’s blood or bone marrow. The harvested stem cells are concentrated and frozen for preservation. Next, the patient receives high-dose chemotherapy to destroy any cancer cells in your body. This also kills all the stem cells in the bone marrow. Lastly, the harvested stem cells are returned (transfused) to the patient, where they’ll grow new, healthy blood-forming stem cells in the bone marrow. additional factors—including your goals and preferences. Because the procedure can be risky and the side effects harsh, it may not be a useful option for people who are older or frail. Ask your team about the benefits and risks of having a stem cell rescue.
2871	If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating lymphomas in the brain. Can primary CNS lymphoma be cured? Curing primary CNS lymphoma is rare, but it may be possible if it’s diagnosed early and treated immediately. Sometimes the bigger problem is managing the major side effects of the intense treatment. People who are younger, healthier, and more physically fit have a better chance for a cure. In most people, primary CNS lymphoma can’t be cured, but it can be treated. Treatment can slow down its growth and reduce its symptoms for a period of time, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Joining a clinical trial of a potential new therapy is another recommended option. Treatment may be able to put primary CNS lymphoma into remission. Remission means there are no symptoms or signs of cancer. Remission may last for months or years.
2872	Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs) fight infections. Platelets (PLTs) help control bleeding. Blood stem cells Bone marrow contains stem cells. A blood stem cell is an immature cell that can develop into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. Blood cells are being replaced in your body all the time. Many have a short lifespan. Some white blood cells live less than one day. Your body makes one million red blood cells every second! How blood cells are formed Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very immature to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. After a blood stem cell develops into a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet, it is released in your bloodstream as needed. Blood stem cells can copy themselves or “selfrenew.” These cells are rare.
2873	One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy. This is typically only needed for a short time. Another possibility is that a colostomy may be done first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. Lastly, in rare cases, a mesh metal tube called a stent may be placed first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. The stent keeps the colon open, allowing gas and stool to pass. Staging The cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body. Having a general idea of the structure of the colon wall is helpful for understanding how colon cancer is staged. The colon wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with food. This layer is called the mucosa. The next layer is the submucosa. It is made of connective tissue and contains mucus glands, blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia).
2874	It’s the recommended procedure when a brain tumor is in a hard-to-reach or vital area. It aims to remove only enough of the tumor to make a diagnosis. A stereotactic biopsy is done by a neurosurgeon in an operating room. First, you’ll be fitted with a frame or several tiny markers around your head to aid the surgery. Next, you’ll be given anesthesia to go to sleep. A small area of your hair will be shaved down to the scalp. The neurosurgeon will then make a little opening in your skull and insert a thin, hollow needle into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. A computerized navigation system, connected to MRI or CT imaging, will allow the surgeon to target and remove the sample with a high degree of precision. After removal, the opening in your scalp will be closed with sutures and you’ll be able to go home. What an MRI shows An MRI scan highlights primary CNS lymphoma in the brain. People with primary CNS lymphoma may have one or multiple tumors appear on their scan. Image: Stephanie E. Weiss, MD, FASTRO The tissue sample will be sent to a laboratory for analysis.
2875	It may be possible to remove or destroy the new cancer growth(s) using one or more of the treatments listed below. Resection (surgery) EBRT Ablative therapies Ablative therapies destroy cancerous lesions with little harm to nearby tissue. They are often delivered using a specially designed needle (a probe or electrode) placed directly into or next to the tumor. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT that may be used to treat tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone. Only a few treatment sessions are needed. If treatment with the local therapies listed above is complete, systemic therapy may follow. Systemic therapy Metastatic cervical cancer is usually treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. If you had prior treatment with cisplatin, it may not work as well again on its own. In this case, it is often given with 1 or 2 other medicines, as part of a combination regimen. A factor your doctor will consider when selecting a systemic therapy regimen to use first (as “first-line” therapy) is whether the cancer has the PD-L1 biomarker. At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen.
2876	Squamous cell skin cancer does not metastasize often. For this reason, there is not much research on the best way to treat metastatic squamous cell skin cancer. A discussion between different cancer doctors is recommended to consider your treatment options. If surgery and/or radiation therapy cannot remove metastatic CSCC, systemic therapy is recommended. If you are eligible, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is preferred. Enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy is another option. A clinical trial could involve treatment with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. If you are not eligible for an immune checkpoint inhibitor or a clinical trial, options for systemic therapy include platinum-based chemotherapy and targeted therapy. Help for symptoms Radiation therapy and/or surgery may be used to treat distant tumors that are causing pain or other bothersome side effects. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is a special radiation technique that may be used in some cases. It sends high doses of radiation to small areas to kill cancer cells and is typically given over 3 to 5 treatments. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes is called “regional”.
2877	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
2878	Some imaging tests use contrast. Contrast is a substance that makes the pictures clearer. It is injected into your vein and/or mixed with a liquid to drink. Tell your doctor if you’ve had problems with contrast in the past. You may be given or advised to take a steroid and an antihistamine medication (like Benadryl) before the scan. It will lower the risk of an allergic reaction. MRI If surgery is needed or being considered, your doctor will order magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of your pelvis. MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Special techniques called a staging protocol are used to stage the cancer. Contrast may or may not be used. MRI doesn't use radiation and is safe for most people. People with certain heart monitors, pacemakers, or some types of surgical clips generally can't have MRI. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver.
2879	The role of blood stem cells is to make cells called intermediaries that will become red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These intermediaries are called progenitor cells or precursor cells. There are different types of progenitor cells: Lymphoid progenitor cells form into lymphoblasts that mature into lymphocytes. Myeloid progenitor cells form into myeloblasts and other non-lymphoid blood cells. ALL is thought to arise from stem cells that make an increased amount of lymphoid progenitor cells. Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. ALL affects the lymphoid progenitor cells, which develop into a type of white blood cell called lymphocytes. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® (NCCN®). www.nccn.org What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for ALL provides an overview of tests your child might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy.
2880	To treat thyroid cancer, radiation is given using a large machine outside the body. This is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Radiation therapy is rarely used for papillary and follicular cancers. Anaplastic thyroid cancer, in contrast, is almost always treated with radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be used for thyroid cancer that can't be removed with surgery and doesn't respond to RAI therapy. Radiation therapy can also relieve symptoms caused by cancer spread, such as difficulty or pain swallowing, loss of your voice, or pain or stiffness in your neck. It may also be helpful if the cancer has spread to another organ, such as the bones or brain, to stop the cancer from growing in that specific area. You will first have a planning session called a simulation. You will be placed in the treatment position and a CT scan or other type of scan will be done. The images will be used to make a radiation plan tailored to your body and cancer. During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation.
2881	Tumor return after treatment Recurrent tumors are cancer that has returned after treatment, usually after a period of time during which the cancer could not be detected. All treatment types have a risk of recurrence. The cancer may come back to the same place as the original (primary) tumor or to another place in the body. Any tumor that has returned after treatment is considered a high-risk squamous cell skin cancer. Tumor formed in damaged skin If squamous cell skin cancer starts in an area that was previously treated with radiation therapy, it is considered a high-risk cancer. This is also the case if the cancer starts in a wound, a scar, or an area of damaged or inflamed skin. Nerve damage If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under a microscope, it is considered a high-risk or very high-risk cancer. This is also called perineural invasion. Signs that the cancer may have invaded nerves include pain, burning, stinging, loss of feeling or movement, and double or blurred vision. Tumor grade The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
2882	Stitches are often used to close the opening in the skin. Excision biopsy During an excision biopsy, all or part of the lesion is removed. This biopsy can be done in Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, test types (blood, imaging, pathology, radiology, and genetics), treatments, and procedures. Organize items in the folder by date. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used.
2883	A colectomy can be done in two ways. The open method removes tumor tissue through a Colectomy Surgery for colon cancer is called colectomy. It involves removing the cancerous part of the colon. The two healthy ends of the remaining colon are then attached to each other. large cut in your abdomen. The minimally invasive method involves making a few small cuts. Tools are inserted through the cuts to see and remove part of your colon. The tissue removed during surgery is sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines how far the cancer has grown within the colon wall. They also test the removed lymph nodes for cancer. These results are used to assign the cancer a stage. The stage helps determine whether you need chemotherapy after surgery. At the time of colectomy, some people may also have a procedure called a colostomy. This is done in cases where it may not be safe to reconnect the remaining sections of colon. In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma.
2884	Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes is called “regional”. Your care team will test suspicious lymph nodes to determine how far the disease has spread. Testing could also include scans of your upper body, stomach, and pelvis to check for any metastatic disease (spread) to those areas. The best way to treat regional CSCC is with surgery to remove the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. Radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy is often given after surgery to kill leftover cancer cells. If surgery is not possible or not recommended, radiation therapy, systemic therapy, or a combination of both may be options. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may harm critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. Although it is uncommon, squamous cell skin cancer can metastasize. Metastatic CSCC that cannot be removed with surgery and/or radiation is treated with systemic therapy. Systemic therapy options for metastatic CSCC include immunotherapy or a systemic therapy given in a clinical trial. If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy.
2885	Squamous cell carcinoma (squaymous) forms from cells that line the bronchi. What is early and locally advanced NSCLC? Early and locally advanced lung cancers have not spread to the tissue lining around the lung or to other organs. The difference between early and locally advanced cancer is mainly based on the cancer stage. Cancer stages 1, 2, and 3 A cancer stage describes the extent of lung cancer in the body. The main stages of NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Early and Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 2024 Cancers that have spread to the lungs are not lung cancers. For example, stomach cancer that has spread to the lungs is still stomach cancer. lung cancer are often written with Roman numerals—stages I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). We will be listing stages as 1, 2, 3, and 4 to make the stages easier to read. At diagnosis, stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 cancers have grown from the airway into lung tissue. Some have spread to nearby diseasefighting structures called lymph nodes. Stage 1 is early NSCLC. In general, stage 2 and stage 3 are considered locally advanced.
2886	Pylorus – connects the stomach to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The pylorus is a valve that opens and closes during digestion. This allows partly digested food and other stomach contents to pass from the stomach to the small intestine. The esophagus joins the stomach just below the diaphragm at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). The diaphragm is the thin breathing muscle below the lungs and heart that separates the chest from the abdomen. The EGJ might be referred to as the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). Parts of the stomach The parts of the stomach include the cardia, the fundus, the body, the antrum, and the pylorus. The stomach is part of the digestive system. Many lymph nodes can be found along the lesser and greater curvatures of the stomach. Stomach wall The stomach is made up of several layers. The inner and outer layers are membranes. A membrane is a very thin layer that covers a surface. In between these membranes are layers of muscle and connective tissue. The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food.
2887	your care team to review the pathology report with you. Biopsy of the metastasis A biopsy of a metastasis can be taken from a lymph node, an internal organ, or a bone. This biopsy is performed in a similar way to a prostate biopsy—using a hollow needle to remove cores of tissue. Sometimes, a blood sample is taken, also called a “liquid biopsy,” to look for cancer cells in the blood. Having a biopsy may cause complications. A complication is an unwanted and unplanned result from a procedure. Complications may include infection, bleeding from the rectum, or blood in the urine, stool, or semen. These usually go away after a few days or, with semen, after a few weeks. It’s also important to know that a biopsy won’t cause prostate cancer to spread or worsen. Genetic tests A genetic test is used to find harmful changes in your genes. Genes are small segments of DNA inside every cell. Genes provide the instructions to tell the cell how to make proteins, which carry out a lot of important functions in the body. Once in a while, a gene will have or develop a change, called a mutation, that damages its function.
2888	In a colostomy, the remaining upper part of the colon is attached to an opening on the surface of the abdomen. This opening is called a stoma. Stool exits the body through the stoma and enters a bag attached to the skin. This is typically only needed for a short time. For colon cancer surgery, the colostomy can often be reversed with another operation. Colostomy is also known as diversion because it diverts (redirects) the flow of stool. Colostomy If the two healthy ends of the remaining colon cannot be safely reconnected after the cancer is removed, a colostomy may be performed. A colostomy connects a part of the colon to the outside of the abdomen. This creates an opening in your abdomen that allows stool to pass through. For colon cancer surgery, it is rare for a colostomy not to be reversed with another operation. Bowel blockage In rare cases, a tumor may grow so large that it blocks the flow of stool. There are several ways to deal with a blockage. One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy.
2889	Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. Our body has 206 bones. Bones provide structure and support, protect our organs, create blood cells, store chemicals the body needs, and produce hormones. Bone is light, yet strong and can regrow. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for bone cancer provides an overview of tests you might receive, how fertility might be impacted by treatment, and the role of biomarker and tumor mutation testing.
2890	The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke, ask your care team about resources and programs that can help you quit. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Staging The results of imaging and the other testing just described are used to determine the stage (extent) of the cancer. Your treatment options will depend on the cancer stage. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) system is used to stage cervical cancer. There are four main stages in the FIGO system: I (1), II (2), III (3), and IV (4). The stages are broken down into sub-stages that have letters and may also have a number. The following information is used to stage the cancer in the FIGO system: The size or extent/depth of the tumor Whether any lymph nodes have cancer Whether the cancer has spread to involve nearby organs such as the bladder or rectum Whether the cancer has spread to distant organs such as the liver, lungs, and/or bone (metastasized) The stages are explained and pictured on the following pages. In general, people with earlier cancer stages have better outcomes, but not always.
2891	Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle. Striated muscle generates force and contracts. It is under your control (voluntary). Middle esophagus The middle part of the esophagus is a mixture of striated and smooth muscle. Lower esophagus The lower part of the esophagus consists only of smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is not under your control. It is involuntary, like a reflex. Esophagogastric junction The esophagogastric junction (EGJ) is the place where the stomach and the esophagus meet, found just beneath the diaphragm. It is also called the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). It separates the contents of the esophagus from the contents of the stomach (acid). Esophageal cancer Cancer of the esophagus (or esophageal cancer) starts when cells in the epithelium of the esophagus begin to grow out of control. There are 2 types of esophageal cancer: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well.
2892	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
2893	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
2894	From here, the dye travels through the lymphatics in the breast to the lymph nodes. This helps the surgeon find which of the nodes are the sentinel lymph nodes. Once the nodes are found, those containing the radioactive material or dye are removed and tested by a pathologist. If cancer is found, then more than the sentinel lymph nodes may be removed. Skin biopsy A sample of inflamed skin on the breast will likely be removed to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer. Biopsy results Histology is the study of the anatomy (structure) of cells, tissues, and organs under a microscope. It is used to make treatment decisions. Your pathology report will contain information about histology. You may be recommended to have an open biopsy (surgery) to remove (excise) the tumor to confirm histology. Talk to your health care provider for more information on next steps. Hormone receptor status A hormone is a substance made by a gland in your body. Your blood carries hormones throughout your body. A receptor is a protein found inside or on the surface of a cell. Substances such as hormones attach (bind) to these receptors. This causes changes within the cell.
2895	If you have already started standard treatment, you may not be eligible for certain clinical trials. Try not to be discouraged if you cannot join. New clinical trials are always becoming available. Frequently asked questions There are many myths and misconceptions surrounding clinical trials. The possible benefits and risks are not well understood by many with cancer. Will I get a placebo? Placebos (inactive versions of real medicines) are almost never used alone in cancer clinical trials. It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance.
2896	One option is a colectomy that also unblocks the bowel. This is known as a one-stage colectomy. A second option is colectomy with colostomy. This is typically only needed for a short time. Another possibility is that a colostomy may be done first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. Lastly, in rare cases, a mesh metal tube called a stent may be placed first, followed by a second surgery to remove the cancer. The stent keeps the colon open, allowing gas and stool to pass. Staging The cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body. Having a general idea of the structure of the colon wall is helpful for understanding how colon cancer is staged. The colon wall is made of layers of tissue. Cancer starts in the innermost layer that comes in contact with food. This layer is called the mucosa. The next layer is the submucosa. It is made of connective tissue and contains mucus glands, blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. The submucosa is followed by a layer of muscle called the muscularis propria. The outer, fourth layer is called serosa (or adventitia).
2897	Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs. Layers of the stomach wall The wall of the stomach is made up of 5 layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscle layer, subserosa, and serosa. Stomach cancer Most stomach (gastric) cancers start in the cells that line the inside of the stomach and make mucus. These are called adenocarcinomas. Almost all stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas. Adenocarcinomas of the stomach are the focus of this book. There are 2 major types of stomach adenocarcinomas. Intestinal – Cells of the intestinal type stick together and form tube- and glandshaped structures. This type is more likely to have mutations that can be treated with targeted therapy. Diffuse – Cells of the diffuse type don’t stick together and appear scattered over a wide area that can't be easily seen on the surface. This type is less common. Treatment is based on the type of stomach cancer and the location of the tumor.
2898	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
2899	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
2900	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
2901	Your skin may bruise. If the blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) subtype of AML is suspected, you might also have a lymph node biopsy or a skin lesion biopsy. Flow cytometry Flow cytometry is a laboratory method used to detect, identify, and count specific cells. Flow cytometry involves adding a light-sensitive dye to cells. The dyed cells are passed through a beam of light in a machine. The machine measures the number of cells, as well as things like the size and shape of the cells. Flow cytometry may be used on cells from circulating (peripheral) blood or from a bone marrow aspirate. A blood test can count the number of white blood cells, but it cannot detect the subtle differences between different types of blood cancers. Flow cytometry can detect these subtle differences. The most common use of flow cytometry is in the identification of markers on cells, particularly in the immune system (called immunophenotyping). Immunophenotyping Immunophenotyping is a process that uses antibodies to detect the presence or absence of white blood cell antigens called biomarkers. These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells.
2902	AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment. Chapter 4: AML discusses treatment for AML. Chapter 5: APL discusses treatment of a rare subtype of AML. In APL, the abnormal fusion gene PML::RARA is found.
2903	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
2904	An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation. It uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of areas inside the body. Getting an MRI scan is similar to getting a CT scan but takes longer. Like a CT scan, a contrast agent may be used to make the pictures clearer. You will lie on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The machine is more enclosed than a CT scan. Tell your care team if you get nervous in enclosed spaces. You may be given a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT scan A CT scan is a more detailed kind of -ray. It takes a lot of pictures, or images, from different angles. A computer then combines the images to make 3-D pictures. PET CT or MRI are sometimes combined with positron emission tomography (PET). A PET scan shows how your cells are using a simple form of sugar, which can be helpful for identifying cancer. A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein.
2905	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
2906	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
2907	 See Part 3 for more information on local CSCC. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, it is called “regional” squamous cell skin cancer.  See Part 4 for more information on regional CSCC. Kno“wing there is treatment available gave me hope at diagnosis and for the future. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common type of skin cancer. It is highly treatable and can often be cured. Squamous cell skin cancer is most commonly caused by getting sunburns or spending too much time in the sun over many years. h An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin that has a higher chance of becoming squamous cell skin cancer. You may be more likely to get squamous cell skin cancer if you have actinic keratoses, a weakened immune system, or certain genetic syndromes. Squamous cell skin cancer can form in old wounds, burns, or scars. This is called Marjolin’s ulcer and it can be harder to treat. Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer.
2908	Melanocytes: These cells are found in the top layer of skin. Melanin is produced in the melanocytes. Melanin is responsible for the color of our hair, skin, and eyes. In addition to providing color, melanin also protects our skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. Risk factors A risk factor is something that increases the chances of getting a disease. For example, smoking cigarettes is a risk factor for developing lung cancer. The major risk factors for squamous cell skin cancer are described next. Sunlight/outdoor tanning Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over the course of many years, especially in people who sunburn easily. People with light skin, hair, and eyes who have been in the sun very often throughout their lives are at the highest risk for squamous cell skin cancer. People who work outdoors are also at higher risk. Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun.
2909	Some pharmacists specifically work with people with cancer. Geneticists are doctors who study how traits are passed down from parents to children through genes. They are trained to diagnose and treat genetic disorders and counsel people and families at risk. Oncology nurses are nurses who provide hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. Sometimes, these experts are called nurse navigators. You know your body better than anyone. Help other team members understand: How you feel What you need h What is working and what is not Your goals for treatment Keep a list of names and contact information for each member of your team. This will make it easier for you and anyone involved in your care to know whom to contact with questions or concerns. Superficial treatments Treatments that affect only the top layer of the skin are called superficial treatments. They may be used to treat the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer, called Bowen’s disease. They are also used for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions) that are in the same general area as the Bowen’s lesion.
2910	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2911	h Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. During a physical exam, your health care provider may: It is important to tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and to have regular dental cleanings and checkups. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. If you need any dental work or procedures, they might be recommended before starting certain treatment. Complete head and neck exam A physical exam will include the head and neck. Since the oropharynx is found inside the throat, some parts are not easy to see when your mouth is open. A doctor might use a special mirror or fiberoptic scope passed through your mouth or nose to look at these areas. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer, and your feelings can change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help.
2912	Discuss openly the risks and benefits of specific treatments and procedures. Weigh options and share concerns with your doctor. If you take the time to build a relationship with your doctor, it will help you feel supported when considering options and making treatment decisions. Second opinion It is normal to want to start treatment as soon as possible. While cancer should not be ignored, there is time to have another doctor review your test results and suggest a treatment plan. This is called getting a second opinion, and it’s a normal part of cancer care. Even doctors get second opinions! Things you can do to prepare: Check with your insurance company about its rules on second opinions. There may be out-of-pocket costs to see doctors who are not part of your insurance plan. Make plans to have copies of all your records sent to the doctor you will see for your second opinion. Support groups Many people diagnosed with cancer find support groups to be helpful. Support groups often include people at different stages of treatment. Some people may be newly diagnosed, while others may be finished with treatment.
2913	Read Chapter 5 to learn more about treatment with surgery. If you can’t have surgery, there are other good options. Some early cancers are treated with radiation therapy, which is explained in Chapter Other cancers are treated with 2 types of treatments called chemoradiation. Chemoradiation is discussed in Chapter Supportive care addresses the challenges of cancer Supportive care has been shown to extend and enhance life for people with lung cancer. Tell your care team about your symptoms and other needs to get the best supportive care for you. More information on supportive care can be found throughout this book. Clinical trials offer hope to all people with lung cancer Clinical trials are a type of health research that tests new ways of fighting cancer. Ask your care team if there is a clinical trial that is a good fit for you. Learn more about clinical trials in Chapter Advocate for yourself You are an important member of your cancer care team. Discuss the recommendations in this book with your team. Together, you can make a care plan that’s best for you. There is a list of suggested questions in Chapter 9 to ask your team.
2914	Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. Most genes contain information about a specific protein. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system.
2915	Knowing if the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes helps doctors find the best way to treat your cancer. N0 means no cancer is in the regional lymph nodes. Isolated tumor cells (ITCs) may be present. These are malignant cell clusters no larger than . N1mi means micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than , but not larger than ) are found in lymph nodes. N1, N2, N3 means regional lymph node metastases are found. The higher the number, the more lymph nodes that have metastases. M Metastasis Cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body is shown as MThis is metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The most common sites for metastasis are bone and lung. M0 means no evidence of distant metastasis. M1 means distant metastasis is found. This is metastatic breast cancer. Clinical staging Clinical staging of lymph nodes is staging before surgery. Cancer is in axillary nodes Cancer is in internal mammary nodes Cancer is in infraclavicular nodes Cancer is in supraclavicular nodes Grade Grade describes how abnormal the tumor cells look under a microscope (called histology). Higher-grade cancers tend to grow and spread faster than lower-grade cancers.
2916	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
2917	The wall of the stomach is made of 5 main layers. Mucosa – Inner membrane that is in contact with food. It consists of 3 layers: • Surface epithelium – A thin, moist layer of cells that forms the interior stomach lining. Epithelium makes a sticky, thick liquid called mucus that protects the stomach. • Lamina propria – A type of connective tissue found under the epithelium membrane. Within and supported by the lamina propria are stomach glands formed by cells that have the functions of producing enzymes, acid, mucus, and hormones. • Muscularis mucosae – A thin strip of muscle that separates the mucosa from the submucosa. Submucosa – A layer of connective tissue, blood vessels, and nerve cells. It also contains larger lymph vessels and channels. Muscle – A type of soft tissue that helps move food through the stomach. It is also called muscularis propria. Subserosa – A layer of connective tissue that supports the serosa. Serosa – An outer membrane that covers the stomach. The serosa is also called the serous membrane. This membrane allows the stomach to move smoothly against other organs.
2918	This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep). Sentinel lymph node biopsy A sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to which cancer cells most likely spread from a primary tumor. Sometimes, there is more than one sentinel lymph node. A sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a surgery that removes tissue samples to examine sentinel nodes. The lymph nodes will be checked for cancer cells by a pathologist in a lab. Sometimes people can have an SLNB at the same time as surgery. The results will be used to stage the cancer and plan treatment. To locate the sentinel lymph node(s), your surgeon will inject a radioactive, blue-colored substance into your skin near the tumor. The substance will drain into the sentinel lymph nodes. Your surgeon will identify the sentinel lymph nodes using a device and remove them through a small cut in your skin. This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches.
2919	Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship. Anal cancer survivors may experience both short- and long-term health effects of cancer and its treatment. These effects are different for everyone and depend on the treatment(s) received. Your primary care doctor After finishing cancer treatment, your primary care doctor, also known as a general practitioner (GP) or primary care physician (PCP), will play an important role in your care. Your oncologist (cancer doctor) and PCP should work together to make sure you get the follow-up care you need. Your oncologist will develop a written survivorship care plan that includes: A summary of your cancer treatment history, including surgeries, radiation treatments, and chemotherapy A description of possible short-term, late, and long-term side effects Recommendations for monitoring for the return of cancer Information on when your care will be transferred to your PCP Your primary care doctor Clear roles and responsibilities for both your cancer care team and your PCP Recommendations on your overall health and well-being Late and long-term side effects Some side effects of anal cancer treatment can linger longer than expected.
2920	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
2921	Also, not all bright spots found on the PET scan are cancer. It is normal for the brain, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. Biopsy A biopsy is the removal of a sample of tissue from your body for testing. A diagnosis of bone cancer is confirmed using a core needle or surgical biopsy. The placement of the biopsy is critical. Therefore, it is recommended that the biopsy be performed by an experienced surgeon at the center where you will receive treatment. Core needle biopsy removes tissue samples with a hollow needle that can grab a piece of tissue. This is frequently performed under light sedation by an interventional radiologist. It can also be performed by your surgeon in the office.
2922	Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone.
2923	If Mohs surgery or another form of PDEMA is possible, it is usually tried first. Otherwise, another standard surgical excision is typically performed. If cancer still remains and more surgery is not possible, a discussion between different cancer doctors to consider next steps is recommended. Treatment may include radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy. If systemic therapy is planned, platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation. As with other treatments, enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy is also an option. A clinical trial could also involve treatment with chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may damage critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. Immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a recommended treatment option if you are eligible. Enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy is also an option. If surgery is not an option If you are not a candidate for surgery, radiation therapy is typically used instead. Systemic therapy may be given in addition to radiation. If systemic therapy is planned, platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation.
2924	Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place. Surgery to remove one ovary and its fallopian tube is called a unilateral salpingooophorectomy (USO). USO is only an option if the cancer is in 1 ovary and the cancer is appropriate for this procedure. After a USO, you may still be able to become pregnant naturally if you haven’t entered menopause. If the cancer is in both ovaries, a BSO (without hysterectomy) may be an option. While you can't become pregnant naturally after a BSO, pregnancy may be possible using assisted reproductive approaches. One such approach is in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, eggs are fertilized with sperm in a lab to create embryos. The embryos are implanted into the uterus or frozen for future use. The eggs used for IVF may be yours (removed from your ovary before surgery) or donor eggs. Donor eggs are removed from women who have volunteered to go through hormone treatment to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen.
2925	Testing can also show if the cancer has unique features for which there is specific treatment. Multidisciplinary consult There is no tell-tale sign of pancreatic cancer, especially in early stages. Signs of pancreatic cancer may also be caused by other health conditions. Health care providers may suspect pancreatic cancer based on symptoms, such as yellowed skin or eyes called jaundice. Signs of pancreatic cancer on x-rays include widerthan-normal pancreatic ducts or an inflamed pancreas. If your provider suspects pancreatic cancer, testing will be needed. Care team Because pancreatic cancer is complex, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course to diagnose and treat pancreatic cancer. This team of experts should: Be multidisciplinary – Consist of health care providers from different fields of medicine Work at a high-volume center – Be very experienced with pancreatic cancer Care team A care team may include many multidisciplinary members, including a: Diagnostic radiologist Interventional radiologist Pathologist Gastroenterologist Medical oncologist Surgical oncologist Radiation oncologist Geriatrician Registered dietitian Genetic counselor Palliative care provider Mental health provider Many of these experts are supported by nurses, technicians, or assistants who are often on the frontline of cancer care.
2926	Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care. Some members of your care team will be with you throughout your treatment, while others will only be there for parts of it. Get to know your care team and let them get to know you. Depending on your diagnosis, your care team might include the following: Dermatologists are doctors who diagnose and treat skin conditions, including skin cancer. They also do skin exams and can teach you how to do them on your own. Mohs surgeons are doctors (usually dermatologists) who have advanced training in Mohs surgery and reconstruction after surgery. They remove the tumor, ensure no more cancer can be seen using a microscope, and can restore the appearance of the affected area with reconstructive surgery. Surgical oncologists are doctors who are trained to diagnose and surgically treat and remove cancerous tumors, including those that have spread beyond the skin. Medical oncologists are doctors who specialize in prescribing cancer-treatment drugs (chemotherapy). They are trained to diagnose and treat cancer using medicines that may be taken by mouth, be injected, or be given intravenously (through a vein).
2927	Polyps with cancer A polyp is an overgrowth of cells on the inner lining of the colon wall. The most common type is called an adenoma. While it may take many years, adenomas can become invasive colon cancer. Cancer that starts in an adenoma is called an adenocarcinoma. There are 2 main shapes of polyps. Pedunculated polyps are shaped like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. They have a stalk and round top. Sessile polyps are flatter and do not have a stalk. A polyp in which cancer has just started to grow is called a malignant (cancerous) polyp. Most polyps can be removed during a colonoscopy, using a minor surgical procedure called a polypectomy. Colon polyps Polyps are growths on the inner lining of the bowel wall. Some look like mushrooms and stick out from the colon wall. These are called pedunculated polyps. Others are flatter and do not have a stalk. These are called sessile polyps. Often, no further treatment is needed after a polypectomy. In other cases, surgery (resection) of a bigger piece of the colon is needed.
2928	How are gliomas diagnosed? A glioma is often found when it starts causing symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may be a sign of disease. Gliomas cause symptoms when they put pressure on the brain or invade brain tissue. Some people have many symptoms while others don’t have any. Common symptoms of gliomas include: Unusual or frequent headaches Seizures Changes in personality or mood Nausea and vomiting Difficulty speaking or swallowing Muscle weakness Difficulty with walking, balance, or coordination Symptoms provide clues that something is wrong. But they don’t provide enough information to identify a specific illness. Different tests, physical exams, and surgical procedures are required to diagnose a glioma. If these tests show that you have a glioma, your care team will discuss your treatment options with you. If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain tumors. Diagnosis vs. prognosis What’s the difference between your diagnosis and your prognosis? These two words sound alike but they’re very different. Diagnosis: The identification of an illness based on tests. The diagnosis names what illness you have. Prognosis: The likely course and outcome of a disease. The prognosis predicts how your disease will turn out.
2929	Precancer There are abnormal cells on the surface of the anal canal or perianal region. These lesions may develop into cancer. Names for anal precancer include stage 0 anal cancer, anal dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, high-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), and highgrade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL). Treatment may involve close monitoring, electrocautery by an HRA provider, or surgical removal. Stage I In stage I anal cancer, the tumor is 2 cm or smaller. Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage I anal cancer is described as T1, N0, M Stage II Stage II anal cancer is divided into 2 substages, depending on the size of the tumor. Anal tumors larger than 2 cm but not larger than 5 cm are stage IIA. This stage is described as T2, N0, MAnal tumors larger than 5 cm are stage IIB. This stage is described as T3, N0, M Stage II anal cancers have not spread to nearby lymph nodes or to areas far from the anus. Stage III Stage III anal cancer is divided into 3 substages. There may be cancer in nearby lymph nodes.
2930	Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen. It is often an upand-down (vertical) cut from the top of the belly button down to the pelvic bone. This lets your doctor see the tumor and other organs and tissues in your abdomen and pelvis. This method is recommended most often when surgical staging (described next) or cytoreductive surgery is planned. Less often, a minimally invasive type of surgery called laparoscopy may be used. The surgery is performed through a few small cuts in the abdomen. Laparoscopy may be used in select cases, such as when cancer is only in the ovaries. This surgery should only be done by a gynecologic oncologist experienced in this method. Hysterectomy and BSO The most commonly used surgery for ovarian cancer removes the uterus, both ovaries, and both fallopian tubes. Surgical staging If it does not look like the cancer has spread, surgical staging should be performed. Surgical staging is the most accurate way to stage ovarian cancer. This involves taking samples during surgery from organs and tissues where ovarian cancer often spreads. The samples are tested for cancer cells.
2931	All forms of PDEMA allow for complete testing of the edges of any removed tissue. Mohs surgery is the most common form of PDEMA. Mohs surgery can be done in a medical office or surgical suite and should be done by a dermatologic (skin) surgeon who has special training and experience in this procedure. Most patients remain awake during the procedure. After the area is numbed, the visible tumor is first removed using a scalpel. Next, a thin layer of surrounding tissue is removed from under and around the wound. The edges and underside of this tissue are evaluated by the Mohs surgeon using a microscope while you wait. If cancer cells are seen by the surgeon, another thin layer of tissue is removed only from the area of the wound where the cancer was seen. When a removed layer shows no cancer cells at its edges, the procedure is over. Standard surgical excision Standard surgical excision is another option for treating squamous cell skin cancer. A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake.
2932	This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that may be in lymph nodes. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a fine-needle biopsy (FNB). Keep these things in mind Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out and ask for support. Support can be a friend, relative, neighbor, or coworker. This will be a confusing time. You will hear a lot of unfamiliar words. Interact with your health care team, ask questions, and talk about how you feel. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental x-ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaw, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
2933	The breast The breast is a glandular organ made up of milk ducts, fat, nerves, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and other connective tissue. Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma, most of which arise in cells that make up the lining (epithelial cells) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. How breast cancer spreads Cancer cells don’t behave like normal cells. Cancer cells differ from normal cells in the following ways. Primary tumor Over time, cancer cells form a mass called a primary tumor. Invasive Cancer cells can grow into surrounding tissues.
2934	A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging. If surgical staging is performed, the para-aortic lymph nodes are typically removed. Pelvic lymph nodes may or may not be removed. Treatment with all of the following is recommended for most locally advanced cervical cancers: Chemoradiation (EBRT and platinum chemotherapy) Brachytherapy If cancer is found in pelvic lymph nodes, EBRT will include the pelvis. If any para-aortic nodes are known or suspected to have cancer, EBRT will be given to a larger treatment area that includes these nodes as well. While treatment as described above is currently preferred for stage 1B3 and 2A2 cancers, surgery is sometimes recommended. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Surveillance After finishing treatment, you will have testing to look for early signs of possible recurrence. This is known as surveillance. The information that follows applies to surveillance for common types of cervical cancer and for small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the cervix (NECC).
2935	Managing the long-term side effects of cancer and its treatment, staying connected with your primary care doctor, and living a healthy lifestyle are important parts of survivorship. Anal cancer survivors may experience both short- and long-term health effects of cancer and its treatment. These effects are different for everyone and depend on the treatment(s) received. Your primary care doctor After finishing cancer treatment, your primary care doctor, also known as a general practitioner (GP) or primary care physician (PCP), will play an important role in your care. Your oncologist (cancer doctor) and PCP should work together to make sure you get the follow-up care you need. Your oncologist will develop a written survivorship care plan that includes: A summary of your cancer treatment history, including surgeries, radiation treatments, and chemotherapy A description of possible short-term, late, and long-term side effects Recommendations for monitoring for the return of cancer Information on when your care will be transferred to your PCP Your primary care doctor Clear roles and responsibilities for both your cancer care team and your PCP Recommendations on your overall health and well-being Late and long-term side effects Some side effects of anal cancer treatment can linger longer than expected.
2936	Symptoms are often related to the lymphoma’s location in the central nervous system. The most common location is in the central part of the brain. A lymphoma located here may cause specific nerve changes such as leg or arm weakness, or problems with coordination or movement. Other such symptoms may include changes in personality or behavior, depression, confusion, memory problems, loss of bladder control (incontinence), or difficulty speaking or swallowing. As the lymphoma tumor grows, it puts pressure on the CNS. This pressure often leads to neurological symptoms and difficulties, including headaches, nausea, vomiting, or seizures. Changes in eyesight, such as blurry vision or double vision, can also occur. You’ll need several tests to confirm whether you have primary CNS lymphoma or a lymphoma that started in another part of your body, or a different disease with similar symptoms. Important tests include a neurological exam, imaging (MRI or CT scan), and biopsies. A biopsy means taking a sample of fluid or tissue from your body to look for cancer. You’ll also have blood tests, an eye exam, and other tests. If these tests show that you have primary CNS lymphoma, your care team should discuss your treatment options with you.
2937	It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence.
2938	These symptoms are called B symptoms and include: Fevers when you’re not sick Night sweats that drench your sheets Weight loss you didn’t expect Some cancers and other health problems can run in families. Be prepared to discuss the health of your close blood relatives, like your siblings, parents, and grandparents. These are your first- and second-degree relatives, as seen in the figure below. Relatives are 7 to 8 times more likely to develop CLL if there’s a family history. Physical exam Your hematologist/oncologist will perform a physical exam of your body. This exam will include: Checking your vital signs—blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature—and assessing your overall appearance Feeling and listening to organs Assessing your level of pain, if any, when you are touched Checking for swelling Cancer cells can build up in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the liver causing them to swell. Your oncologist will look at and gently press on your body to assess their size. Areas that may be touched include your neck, armpit, belly, and groin. Performance status Performance status is your ability to do daily activities, like feeding yourself or bathing.
2939	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
2940	What is SLL? Small lymphocytic lymphoma, or SLL, is the same cancer as CLL. The only difference between the two is where the abnormal cells are found. CLL is mostly found in the blood and bone marrow. SLL is mostly found in lymph nodes and the spleen. If a person has fewer than 5,000 cancerous cells in their blood, it is considered SLL. Anything more than that is considered CLL. The lymph nodes and spleen play a key role in fighting infections. CLL can also be found in the lymph nodes. Lymph nodes and the spleen may be swollen because of a buildup of CLL or SLL cells. Treatment of CLL and SLL is the same because the cancer cells are the same. For this book, treat any recommendation for CLL as one for SLL. For this reason, the disease is often referred to as CLL/SLL. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team.
2941	In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells. This oversupply of abnormal B cells prevents healthy B cells from performing their duties effectively. This results in fewer healthy blood cells and a higher risk of infection. What are the symptoms of CLL? Usually, CLL doesn’t cause symptoms at first. It may be found due to routine blood testing. Symptoms of CLL may include the following. See a health care professional as soon as you can if you have any of these symptoms: Swollen glands in your neck, or you feel swelling in your stomach Feel tired more easily or fatigue Excessive sweating or night sweats Fever Infections that keep coming back despite treatment Loss of appetite or becoming full too quickly (early satiety) Unintentional weight loss What causes CLL? The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow.
2942	Imaging If biopsy results confirm that the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, a computed tomography (CT) scan of lymph nodes near the CSCC is recommended. The goal is to learn about the number, location, and size of the lymph nodes with cancer. More advanced imaging tests like a PET/CT, that uses special injectable agents to detect cancer, may be needed to see if cancer has spread farther than the lymph nodes, or to help plan treatment. Testing Biopsy If lymph nodes near the CSCC feel swollen or look abnormal on initial imaging tests, the next step is a biopsy. The types of biopsies used for squamous cell skin cancer are fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and core needle biopsy. FNA is also known simply as needle biopsy. Surgical evaluation The results of testing will be considered in order to determine if you are a candidate for surgery to remove the cancerous lesion and nearby lymph nodes. Know your options It is always important to discuss with your doctor and care team about what your treatment options are, and any preferences or concerns you might have.
2943	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
2944	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
2945	All known side effects should also be noted. It is also important to note the goal of treatment and the chance of a good treatment outcome. Keep in mind that your treatment plan may change. Testing may provide new information. How well the treatment is working may change the plan. Or you may change your mind about treatment. Any of these changes may require a new treatment plan. Stress and symptom control Anxiety and depression are common in people with cancer. At your cancer center, cancer navigators, social workers, and others can help. Help may include support groups, talk therapy, exercising, spending time with loved ones, or medication. You may be unemployed or miss work during treatment. Or, you may have little or no health insurance. Talk to your treatment team about work, insurance, or money concerns. They will include information in the treatment plan to help you manage the costs of care. For more information, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Distress During Cancer Care at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app for more information. Supportive care Supportive care aims to relieve the symptoms of cancer or the side effects of cancer treatment.
2946	Look for descriptions of team members throughout this book. Consult meeting When your care team meets to consult with one another, they will review your health records and the tests done prior to your visit. Expect to be asked questions about your past and current health. This is called a medical history. You will also be asked about the health history of your close blood relatives. A team member will perform a physical exam of your body to check for signs of disease and to assess your physical ability. You will likely have at least one imaging scan and some of the other tests listed in Guide The team will discuss the diagnosis with you and if you need more tests. They will also discuss your treatment options. One of the main goals of the team is to decide if surgery is an option. The team will work with you to make a care plan that is specific to you. Stay positive, seek happiness and joy, surround yourself with love, and connect to a higher power." Prostate cancer basics What is prostate cancer? What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? What causes prostate cancer? What is early-stage prostate cancer?
2947	An advanced type of EBRT called intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is often used to treat cervical cancer. IMRT uses many small beams of different strengths. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as the bowel, bladder, external genitalia, and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a highly specialized type of EBRT used to treat metastatic cervical cancer. High doses of radiation are delivered to tumors in the liver, lungs, or bone using very precise beams. Treatment is typically delivered in 5 or fewer sessions. Side effects Common side effects during the 5 to 6 weeks of EBRT include fatigue, skin redness and irritation, diarrhea, nausea, and frequent or painful urination. Most of these side effects develop gradually. They increase during treatment and gradually decrease once treatment is over. When the ovaries are included in the radiation field, it causes premature (early) menopause. The symptoms are similar to those caused by surgical menopause, as described above.
2948	The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors. Radiation exposure Anyone who has had radiation treatment to the head or neck in the past (to treat a childhood cancer, for example) is at increased risk of thyroid cancer. Contact with large amounts of radiation in the environment as a result of a catastrophic event also increases the risk of developing a thyroid cancer. Family history Most thyroid cancers are sporadic, meaning there is no clear cause or risk factor. Only a small number are hereditary, or the result of inherited gene mutations (changes). A personal or family history of thyroid cancer or a related syndrome may increase the risk of thyroid cancer. Syndromes related to thyroid cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Carney complex, Cowden syndrome, and multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Cowden syndrome is also known as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). This inherited syndrome can cause follicular thyroid cancer, and other cancers and health problems. Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck.
2949	Patients with the highest risk are given the first opportunity to receive it. If a regular course of BCG treatment isn’t available to you, your treatment team may offer intravesical treatment with chemotherapy instead. Other options include: Reduced doses or a shorter course of BCG treatment Eliminating BCG maintenance therapy Bladder removal surgery (for those at high risk of the cancer returning after treatment) Joining a clinical trial Systemic therapy Systemic therapy means a treatment that affects the whole body. It’s generally given directly into a vein (intravenously, or IV). The most common types of systemic therapy for bladder cancer are chemotherapy and immunotherapy. To determine which type of systemic therapy is best for you, your treatment team will consider your overall health. This includes how your heart, liver, and kidneys are functioning, how far the cancer has progressed, and your ability to do day-to-day activities. Note that systemic chemotherapy is different than intravesical chemotherapy. Systemic chemotherapy is a whole-body therapy. Intravesical chemotherapy only affects the inside of the bladder. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion).
2950	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
2951	Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer. Immune suppression – People with weakened immune systems from organ transplants or autoimmune diseases are at higher risk for basal cell skin cancer. How is basal cell skin cancer treated? Basal cell skin cancer is highly treatable and curable. Catching it and treating it early is key. Surgery is the most common treatment for basal cell skin cancer. In some cases, radiation therapy or systemic therapy might be used to treat it. Following your treatment, you will have full skin exams with your doctor at least once a year. Between these periods, prevention is important. See Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence for more information. Recurrence is when basal cell skin cancer returns to the area where it was originally found, or it has metastasized (spread) to the lymph nodes or to distant parts of the body. But there are several options for how to treat it. Read more about how your cancer is treated in Chapter 3: Types of treatment and Chapter 4: Treatment by risk and recurrence. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself.
2952	Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches. Tumors take advantage of "off switches." Two leading off switches are PD-1 and CTLAImmunotherapy can be given alone or with other types of treatment. An immunotherapy example is pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Endocrine therapy Endocrine therapy blocks estrogen or progesterone to treat hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. The endocrine system is made up of organs and tissues that produce hormones. Hormones are natural chemicals released into the bloodstream. There are 4 hormones that might be targeted in endocrine therapy: Estrogen is made mainly by the ovaries, and also by other tissues in the body such as the fat tissue. Progesterone is made mainly by the ovaries. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is made by a part of the brain called the hypothalamus. It tells the ovaries to make estrogen and progesterone and testicles to make testosterone. LHRH is also called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Androgen is made by the adrenal glands, testicles, and ovaries. Hormones may cause breast cancer to grow.
2953	This book will discuss treatment options for the following CBCLs: PCMZL (PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder) PCFCL Treatment for PC-DLBCL, leg type can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) develops from abnormal T cells. Information on types of CTCL such as mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (PCLPDs) can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL) is an NHL found in the skin. It is not skin cancer. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation. When they grow on their own without proper regulation, they can develop into lymphoma. Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (CBCLs) are lymphomas of the skin that appear as lumps that look like small pimples called papules. Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In primary cutaneous lymphoma (PCL), abnormal lymphocytes cause skin lesions.
2954	Lymphocytes A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. There are 2 types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL Within each type there are several subtypes, which are based mainly on: The type of lymphocyte (most often B cell or T cell) within the leukemia cells and how mature the cells are. This is known as the immunophenotype of the leukemia. If the leukemia cells have specific gene or chromosome changes. B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems.
2955	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
2956	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
2957	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
2958	It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors. This book covers treatment for ALL in infants, children, and young adults. What is ALL? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a fastgrowing blood cancer that starts in diseasefighting white blood cells of your immune system called lymphocytes. In ALL, bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts (or blasts). Lymphoblasts can crowd out normal bone marrow. This leads to less blood being made. There are 2 main types of ALL: B cell or B-ALL T cell or T-ALL B-ALL B-cell ALL or B-ALL starts in B-cell lymphocytes. B-ALL is more common than T-ALL. Mature B-cell ALL (also called Burkitt leukemia), a rare subtype, is essentially the same as Burkitt lymphoma (a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma), but is treated differently from B-ALL. In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers.
2959	In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, T-LL, or T-LBL. ALL in those under 30 years of age Pediatric refers to ALL found in infants, children, and young adults. Pediatric includes anyone 18 years of age or under, and certain adolescents and young adults (AYAs). AYAs are those 15 to 39 years of age at the time of initial cancer diagnosis. An AYA can be treated in pediatric or adult centers depending on the type of cancer. This book applies to AYAs who are being treated at a pediatric or children’s cancer center. More information for those seeking ALL treatment at an adult cancer center can be found in the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What are lymphocytes? A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell found in blood and lymph tissue, as well as all organs in the body. Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection.
2960	In some cases, the Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your child's care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. B-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the lymph nodes instead of in the bone marrow. When this happens, it is called B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma, B-LL, or B-LBL. T-ALL T-cell ALL or T-ALL starts in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL can cause an enlarged thymus (a small organ in front of the windpipe), which can sometimes lead to breathing problems due to pressure on the windpipe and blood vessels. In some cases, the T-cell lymphoblasts grow mostly in the thymus instead of in the bone marrow.
2961	Chapter 3: Types of treatments gives a general overview of treatment. Everyone with ALL will be treated with steroids and multiagent chemotherapy. Other types of systemic therapy might be given. Chapter 4: Supportive care discusses what is supportive care and possible side effects of treatment. Chapter 5: BCR::ABL1-negative or BCR::ABL1-like B-ALL discusses treatment for the most common type of B-ALL. A clinical trial is the preferred treatment for these types of B-ALL. Chapter 6: BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL treatment aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL protein caused by the BCR::ABL1 gene. Treatment is usually an intensive combination of systemic therapies. Chapter 7: T-ALL discusses a group of cancers that start in T-cell lymphocytes. T-ALL is less common than B-ALL. Treatment options include a clinical trial or chemotherapy. Chapter 8: Infant ALL treatment is different than for other age groups. Infants are those under 12 months of age. Chapter 9: Other resources provides information on patient advocacy groups and where to get help. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for your child and yourself. You have an important role to play in their care.
2962	Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors. Abdominal surgery is also a recommended option for: smaller (T1) tumors, and some larger (T3) cancers that haven't spread to lymph nodes. This method involves cutting into the abdomen to reach and remove the rectal tumor, some surrounding healthy tissue, and nearby lymph nodes. A pathologist examines the removed tissue and determines the cancer stage. The type of transabdominal surgery performed depends on the location of the tumor and the extent of the cancer. At least 12 lymph nodes should be removed during all types of transabdominal surgery. Low anterior resection A low anterior resection (LAR) is a type of transabdominal surgery used for tumors in the mid to upper rectum. In addition to the rectal tumor, part or all of the last section of the colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis.
2963	For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended. A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery. If the results are good, your next colonoscopy will take place in 3 years. After that, a colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years. Other local excision results Sometimes more treatment is needed after local excision. Reasons you may need more treatment include: Testing of the removed tissues finds high risk features The tumor is larger than expected and has invaded the muscle layer (a T2 tumor) In either case, the preferred next treatment is transabdominal surgery. See the next page for more information on this method. A second option is chemotherapy combined with radiation. Doctors call this chemoradiation. This treatment approach is normally used for locally advanced cancers. See page 23 for more information. If chemoradiation works well, you might have chemotherapy next to kill any lingering cancer cells. Or, you and your doctor may agree to watch and wait. If there are signs of cancer after chemoradiation, transabdominal resection is recommended. Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors.
2964	Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors. Abdominal surgery is also a recommended option for: smaller (T1) tumors, and some larger (T3) cancers that haven't spread to lymph nodes. This method involves cutting into the abdomen to reach and remove the rectal tumor, some surrounding healthy tissue, and nearby lymph nodes. A pathologist examines the removed tissue and determines the cancer stage. The type of transabdominal surgery performed depends on the location of the tumor and the extent of the cancer. At least 12 lymph nodes should be removed during all types of transabdominal surgery. Low anterior resection A low anterior resection (LAR) is a type of transabdominal surgery used for tumors in the mid to upper rectum. In addition to the rectal tumor, part or all of the last section of the colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis.
2965	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
2966	It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants. Scoping procedures Some imaging tests use a thin, tube-shaped tool called a scope that is inserted into the mouth or nose body to examine the oropharynx and to take pictures. One end of the scope has a small light and camera lens to see inside your body. The image is sent to a television or computer monitor. This will also help guide your doctor in performing a biopsy. More than one type of scope may be used for imaging tests. The type of scope often used for head and cancer is called an endoscope. An endoscope is often guided into the body through the mouth or nose. Endoscopy might be used to determine the size and spread of tumor and to take a tumor sample. Before an endoscopy, you will be given a topical spray to numb the throat. Some possible endoscopies are described next. You might not have an endoscopy. Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy Fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy is used to examine the larynx (voice box) and nearby structures.
2967	Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen. PARP inhibitors Cancer cells often become damaged. PARP is a cell protein that repairs cancer cells and allows them to survive. Blocking PARP can cause cancer cells to die. Olaparib (Lynparza) and talazoparib (Talzenna) are PARP inhibitors. You must have the BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and your breast cancer must be HER2- for PARP inhibitors to be considered. Did you know? The terms “chemotherapy” and “systemic therapy” are often used interchangeably, but they are not the same. Systemic therapy works throughout the body and includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, endocrine therapy, and others. PIK3CA inhibitor The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancers. A mutation in this gene can lead to increased growth of cancer cells and resistance to various treatments. Alpelisib (Piqray) is an example of a PIK3CA inhibitor. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic treatment that tries to re-activate the immune system against tumor cells. The immune system has many on and off switches.
2968	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
2969	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
2970	It is common to have another colonoscopy to thoroughly examine the colon and look for other possible areas of cancer. This is called a diagnostic colonoscopy. Mismatch repair testing Mismatch repair (MMR) or microsatellite instability (MSI) testing is recommended for everyone diagnosed with colon cancer. This feature of some colon cancers is a type of biomarker. Biomarkers are targetable changes of a cancer that help guide your treatment. Testing involves analyzing a piece of the colon tumor in a lab. Depending on the method used, an abnormal result is called either microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR). Tumors that do not have these changes are referred to as microsatellite stable (MSS) or mismatch repair proficient (pMMR). If the cancer is dMMR/MSI-H, you will also be tested for an inherited condition called Lynch syndrome, described next. Family health history Your doctor will ask about the health history of your biological (related by blood) family members. Those with a first-degree relative with colorectal cancer are more likely to have this cancer compared to the average person. Most colon cancers occur for unknown reasons.
2971	Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence. It shows if a gene has any mutations that might affect how the gene works. NGS looks at the gene in a more detailed way than other methods and can find mutations that other methods might miss. PCR A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that can make millions or billions of copies of your DNA or RNA (genetic information). PCR is very sensitive. It can find 1 abnormal cell among more than 100,000 normal cells. These copies, called PCR products, might be used for NGS. This is important when testing for treatment response or remission. A real-time or reverse transcriptase (RT) is a type of PCR used to look for gene rearrangements such as PML::RARA. This aids in diagnosis and monitoring response to targeted therapies. Imaging tests In some cases, imaging tests may be performed. This is based on your individual situation. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of the body to look for sites with leukemia outside the bone marrow. Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin.
2972	More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area). If you are treated with radiation, you could develop a second cancer in the treated area, but this is rare. This is more common in young patients many years (decades) later. Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with medicine(s) that travel in the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Systemic therapies can affect both cancer cells and normal cells, and they can have side effects. They are given intravenously (through the veins) or taken by mouth as a pill. Categories of systemic therapy are described below. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill fast-growing cancer cells. Some chemotherapy medicines contain the metal platinum. Cisplatin and carboplatin are platinum chemotherapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer and other cancers. They may be given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs. Targeted therapy Targeted therapies are medicines that can target and attack specific types of receptors on cancer cells. The targeted therapies used to treat squamous cell skin cancer are known as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. EGFR is a protein found on the surface of cells that causes them to divide.
2973	A mutation can disrupt how some cells behave, which can cause diseases like cancer. Biomarker testing can improve the accuracy of your diagnosis as well as fine-tune your treatment options. If testing detects a certain mutation, you might be able to receive treatment that’s targeted more precisely to your glioma. Right now, only a few targeted treatments are available for very specific kinds of glioma. But researchers are working on hundreds of clinical trials to find more. The following biomarkers aren’t the only biomarkers of gliomas, but they’re the most commonly tested. Finding these biomarkers (or not finding them) can provide specific information about your glioma. See Guide 1 on the next page. Ask what biomarker testing is available for your glioma. Some hospitals and treatment centers aren’t able to provide a full range of biomarker tests. But you can request your tissue to be sent to another lab for further testing. What’s next? After you’ve been diagnosed and have gone through further testing, your treatment team will discuss your results with you. You’ll also talk about your options for treatment based on your test results. The next chapter discusses the different options for treating gliomas.
2974	Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment. For hyperkeratotic (thick and rough) actinic keratoses, one or more of the following may be used before treatment with the therapies described above. Cryotherapy Cryotherapy freezes and destroys cancer cells using a very cold liquid or tool. h Topical tazarotene (a retinoid product related to vitamin A) Curettage (scraping away skin with a spoon-shaped tool) Topical keratolytics (also called topical urea, lactic acid, or salicylic acid) Other therapies that are sometimes used for actinic keratoses include topical diclofenac, chemical peels (trichloroacetic acid), and resurfacing techniques such as laser or dermabrasion. Topical therapies for squamous cell skin cancer may cause burning, redness, itching, and pain in the treated area. Sun-damaged skin may also need to be re-treated with topical therapies from time to time. Surgery Different types of surgery can be used to treat squamous cell skin cancers. Most surgery procedures involve a form of excision, which Mohs surgery This procedure allows the surgeon to know right away whether all cancer was removed. means cutting out the tumor along with a small margin of normal skin.
2975	Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast. Invasive breast cancer is cancer that has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes under the arm (axilla). Anyone can develop breast cancer, including those assigned male at birth. Although there are some differences between those assigned male and those assigned female at birth, treatment is very similar for all genders. 2 Testing for breast cancer Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor stat HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic cancer risk testing Distress screening Performance status Key points Not all invasive breast cancers are the same. Treatment planning starts with testing.
2976	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
2977	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
2978	Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone. Your treatment team may recommend a different induction therapy if: Your kidneys aren’t working well High-dose chemotherapy is too intense or risky for you Cancer was found in your spine or spinal fluid If you can’t have high-dose methotrexate, other options for induction therapy include: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica) or similar medication Temozolomide (Temodar) Rituximab with or without temozolomide Lenalidomide with or without rituximab High-dose cytarabine h Pemetrexed h Pomalidomide Colon cancer basics 5 6 6 The colon Polyps Key points Colon cancer is common and treatable. Many cancers that start in the colon can be cured, especially when found early. The colon The colon makes up most of the large intestine (bowel). In the colon water is absorbed from eaten food, turning it into feces or stool. After leaving the colon, stool moves into the rectum. The rectum is the last 6 inches or so of the large bowel. Stool is held here until it leaves the body through an opening called the anus.
2979	You may be asked to stop taking some medicines for a short time. You also should not eat or drink after midnight the night before the surgery. On the day of your surgery, you will be given medicine to put you into a deep sleep so you won’t feel pain. This is called general anesthesia. Surgery may take 3 or more hours to complete. More or less time may be needed depending on how much tissue is removed. After the surgery, expect to stay in the hospital for a few days or weeks to recover. You may feel some pain and tenderness in your belly and pelvis. It may last for a few days or weeks. You may be able to return to normal activities in a few weeks. The time it takes to fully recover varies from person to person. It also varies depending on the extent of the surgery. Premature menopause If you have not entered menopause, surgery that removes both ovaries will cause it. This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body.
2980	Breast cancer can metastasize almost anywhere but most commonly spreads to the bone (including spine), lungs, liver, brain, or distant lymph nodes. Breast cancer that has metastasized to other parts of the body is still called breast cancer. More information on invasive breast cancer is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Anyone can develop breast cancer, but breast cancer occurs more frequently in persons assigned female at birth. Inside breasts are lobules, ducts, fat, blood and lymph vessels, ligaments, and connective tissue. Lobules are structures that make breast milk. Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer arises from epithelial cells (cells that make up the lining) in the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) of the breast and then spreads into surrounding tissue. Invasive breast cancer has grown outside the ducts or lobules into surrounding tissue. Once outside the ducts or lobules, breast cancer can spread through lymph or blood to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) has spread outside the breast and lymph nodes. It is possible to have MBC when axillary lymph nodes do not have cancer.
2981	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
2982	Keep your primary care physician (PCP) informed of changes to this list. You are encouraged to keep your PCP in the loop. They are great partners in your care. In your contact list, include information on the exact type of cancer you have, as well as any treatments you've received and the date each treatment started. Set up a MyChart or health record account if it’s available, which can help you track your appointments and communicate with your care team. Test results Results from biopsy and imaging studies will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions and keep copies of your test results. Keep these things in mind: For possible tests, see Guide Choose a friend, family member, or peer who can drive you to appointments, provide meals, or offer emotional support during diagnosis and treatment. Bring someone with you to doctor visits, if possible. Write down questions and take notes during appointments. Don’t be afraid to ask your care team questions. Get to know your care team and help them get to know you.
2983	Hormonal birth control may or may not be recommended, so ask your doctor about options such as intrauterine devices (IUDs) and barrier methods. Types of barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and the contraceptive sponge. Those with ovaries Those who can become pregnant will have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. Cancer treatment can hurt the developing baby if you are or become pregnant during treatment. Therefore, birth control to prevent pregnancy during and after treatment is recommended. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding at the time of your cancer diagnosis, certain treatments will need to be avoided. Menstruation, menses, menstrual flow, or your “period” may stop during treatment, but often returns within 2 years after treatment in those 35 years of age and under. It is still possible to become pregnant even though you might not have a period. Therefore, birth control is recommended during and after treatment. Consult your doctor for the best time to plan a pregnancy. Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment.
2984	Some cancers have DNA mutations for changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-1 and PD-L1 testing Programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) are immune proteins. If either protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses either protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. FISH Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a testing method that involves special dyes called probes that attach to pieces of DNA, the genetic material in a person’s cells. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cancer or immune cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope.
2985	Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell. Normal human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes for a total of 46 chromosomes. Each chromosome contains thousands of genes. Genes are coded instructions for the proteins your cells make. A mutation is when something goes wrong in the genetic code. Proteins are given names such as FLTGenes are identified in italics like this: FLT AML cells sometimes have changes in genes and chromosomes that can be seen under a microscope or found with various other tests. Testing of your leukemia cells can gather specific information about your leukemia to help guide treatment. AML genetic changes AML cells can have changes in genes and chromosomes. Mutation testing looks for these changes or abnormalities that are unique to AML cells. Examples of such changes are called deletion, insertion, inversion, amplification, translocation (rearrangement), and point mutation.
2986	3 Prostate cancer treatments Hormone therapy Non-hormone therapy Clinical trials Supportive care What’s next? Key points There’s more than one treatment for advanced prostate cancer. This chapter describes the available treatment options and what you might expect from them. Talk with your care team about which treatment could be best for you. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with many treatment options. Treatments for advanced-stage prostate cancer include hormone therapy as well as non-hormone therapies like chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy. Often, hormone therapy is combined with one or more other therapies. Combining therapies can be more effective than using either therapy alone. key word in ADT is “deprivation”—this therapy “deprives” (starves) the cancer of its main fuel: androgens. This can shrink the tumor or slow tumor growth for a while. You might hear the term “castration” used when describing prostate cancer or its treatment. This term describes a drastic reduction of testosterone. Castration can be done with hormone-lowering medication or by surgical removal of one or both testicles (orchiectomy). Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles.
2987	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
2988	It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support. These can be different people for different tasks or change over time. Consider bringing someone with you to doctor visits if possible, or have someone on the phone or join you for telehealth visits. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too. Tests used to diagnose CML can be found in Guide  About ALL What is ALL? What are lymphocytes? What is blood? What's in this book? What can you do to get the best care? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Treatment depends on the type of ALL, age at diagnosis, and other factors.
2989	Treatment may be able to put primary CNS lymphoma into remission. Remission means there are no symptoms or signs of cancer. Remission may last for months or years. However, even with the best treatment, primary CNS lymphoma often comes back (relapses) in the brain, spinal cord, or the eye. It’s true that primary CNS lymphoma is fatal for some patients. Anyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma has a difficult road ahead. Still, there’s hope. In the past few years, improved detection methods have shortened the time to diagnosis and led to better outcomes, even in people with weakened immune systems. Therapies specifically designed to treat primary CNS lymphoma are currently being studied in clinical trials. The number of these trials has increased in recent years, offering more hope to people living with this disease. What’s next? This chapter provides only a brief overview of primary CNS lymphoma. The next chapters explain: Tests needed to diagnose the disease Different treatment options and what they do Which treatment options are right for you What happens after treatment Thoughts on next steps 66 Don’t Google your diagnosis and assume that statistics define your life! Every person’s brain tumor story and situation is different.
2990	The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery. However, the area often doesn’t heal as well because the tissues were weakened by the radiation. This is especially true for CSCC on the scalp. A radiation oncologist should help you determine whether this treatment is appropriate for you. Adjuvant therapy refers to therapy that is given after primary treatment to lower the risk that cancer will come back. Radiation is sometimes used as adjuvant therapy after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells, or to help prevent recurrence for patients with high-risk tumors. Side effects of radiation therapy The most common short-term side effects of radiation are skin redness, itching, mild discomfort, and feeling tired. These side effects are worse at the end of the radiation course and take several weeks to go away. Potential long-term side effects of radiation include hardening of the skin and soft tissue in the treatment area, mild change in skin color (lightening or darkening), and spider veins. More serious long-term side effects include non-healing ulcers and cataracts (for CSCC in the eye area).
2991	During radiation treatment, you will lie on a table in the same position as during simulation. A technician will operate the machine from a nearby room, but will be able to see, hear, and speak with you at all times. You won't feel anything while the radiation is being delivered. One treatment session can take 30 to 60 Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. It is also used to treat pain caused by the cancer. minutes. It's common to have 5 sessions per week. Common side effects of radiation to the neck area include: Skin rash or redness Problems swallowing Dry mouth h Thick saliva Changes in taste Tiredness While most side effects of radiation therapy start during treatment and stop shortly after it is over, some can occur years later. If your doctor recommends external radiation, they will discuss what to expect from treatment, including possible short- and long-term side effects. Fertility and family planning If you want the option of having children after treatment or are unsure, tell your care team.
2992	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
2993	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
2994	This chapter discusses how experts decide if this nodule is cancer. Lung nodule experts Most lung nodules are not cancer, but some are. Nodules can be caused by cancer, infections, scar tissue, and other health conditions. When a nodule found by chance seems to be cancer, it takes a team of experts to decide the best course of care. Your care team should consist of members from different fields of medicine, including the following board-certified experts: h A pulmonologist is a doctor who’s an expert in lung diseases. A thoracic radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in imaging of the chest. Imaging takes pictures of the inside of the body. h A thoracic surgeon is a doctor who is an expert in operations within the chest. To decide if a nodule is cancer, your team will do the following: Assess your risk for lung cancer. Review lung images and request more imaging if there may be cancer. Perform a procedure called a biopsy, if needed. Lung nodule A lung nodule is a small mass of tissue in the lung. Many people have lung nodules. Most are not cancer.
2995	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
2996	Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have. A medical or health history will help determine which treatment is best for you. Family history Some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your doctor will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history. Ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. Physical exam During a physical exam, a health care provider may: Check your temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and breathing rate Check your weight and height Listen to your lungs and heart Look in your eyes, ears, nose, and throat Feel and apply pressure to parts of your body to see if organs are of normal size, are soft or hard, or cause pain when touched. Tell your doctor if you feel pain. Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain.
2997	PS 5 means the person is not alive. In head and neck cancer, PS might be referred to as good or poor. Good PS is usually PS 0 or PS Pre-anesthesia exam Anesthesia is loss of feeling or awareness caused by drugs. It keeps you from feeling pain from surgery or other procedures. A pre-anesthesia assessment will be done by the anesthesiologist. It will include a physical exam of your throat and airway. You be asked questions about your medical history, past surgery experiences, if you have any allergies to drugs or medicines, your understanding of the procedure, and how your appearance and function might change. Head and neck cancer surgery is complex. It is further complicated by other health conditions, airway and swallowing issues, tobacco and alcohol use, and tumor location. Being prepared and knowing what to expect after surgery will help prevent severe complications. Fertility (all genders) Treatment such as chemotherapy can affect your fertility, the ability to have children. If you think you want children in the future, ask your care team how cancer and cancer treatment might change your fertility. To preserve your fertility, you may need to take action before starting cancer treatment.
2998	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat near the voice box (hypopharynx). More information on nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) and throat (oropharyngeal) cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancers to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. Mouth cancer Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is also called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer. Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped into a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly. Mouth cancer starts in the squamous cells that form the surface lining of the mouth.
2999	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
3000	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
3001	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
3002	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
3003	It is the second most common type of skin cancer, after basal cell carcinoma. The third type—melanoma—is much less common than the other types but can be more aggressive. Because they do not behave like melanoma, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are often referred to as nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte carcinomas. Cancer that starts in a squamous cell is called a squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cells are found in the top layer of the skin. They can also be found in other areas of the body, such as the lungs, thyroid, and esophagus. These types are treated differently than cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Squamous cell skin cancers often begin as scaly patches on the skin that can become solid and misshapen. This cancer is also called cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). This patient guide is about squamous cell skin cancer only. The terms “squamous cell skin cancer” and “CSCC” are used interchangeably throughout this guide. Skin basics Your skin is the largest organ of the body. Skin protects you from invaders (such as microbes), helps control body temperature, and allows the sensations of touch, heat, and cold.
3004	However, those with cancer found outside the mediastinum (extra-mediastinal disease) should be diagnosed as having DLBCL, not otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS), see page Treatment Since MGZL has features of both classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) and non-Hodgkin PMBL, treatment is a challenge. Currently, there is no standard of care or agreement on treatment. MGZL is usually treated with chemotherapy. If the tumor cells are , rituximab might be added to chemotherapy. This is called chemoimmunotherapy. Involvedsite radiation therapy (ISRT) may be added in those with localized disease. For possible systemic therapy options, see Guide About thyroid cancer 5 The thyroid 6 Who is at risk? 7 Key points There are different types of thyroid cancer. Most are curable with the right treatment. When possible, surgery is recommended for most thyroid cancers. The thyroid The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the front of the neck. It has 2 lobes, a right and a left. A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly.
3005	Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues.
3006	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
3007	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
3008	This is part of your cancer care. Eye exam Sometimes, nasopharyngeal cancer can affect the eyes. An eye exam might be recommended before starting treatment. Endocrine tests Radiation therapy to the head and neck can affect endocrine (hormone) glands found in the head and neck, such as thyroid and pituitary glands. Therefore, blood tests to look at thyroid endocrine levels might be done before and/or after treatment. Hearing test A hearing test shows if there is any hearing loss, and if so, the type of hearing loss, how severe it is, and what might have caused it. An audiogram is a graph showing the results of a pure-tone hearing test. Tumors in the head and neck can affect hearing. Treatment of head and neck tumors can also affect hearing. Nutrition assessment You might meet with a nutrition expert before starting treatment. A nutritionist or dietician can suggest the best foods and fluids for you. It is important that you receive adequate and sustained nutrition before you start treatment. Speech and swallowing assessment You might visit with a speech or swallowing therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak before and after treatment.
3009	A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous. A high TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are low. A low TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are high. This is called hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid. Your provider may order a radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake test. Ultrasound Ultrasound is the most common imaging technique used to look for thyroid cancer. It uses sound waves to form images showing the size, shape, and location of a thyroid nodule. An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is brief and painless. It is usually done lying down. A Ultrasound An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is one of the first tests ordered if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. hand-held device called an ultrasound probe is used. After a gel is applied to the skin, the probe is moved back and forth over the thyroid area. If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer.
3010	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
3011	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
3012	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
3013	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
3014	If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. Biopsy A biopsy removes samples of fluid or tissue from the body to be tested. Your doctor will consider the nodule size and other features as seen on the ultrasound to determine if a biopsy is needed. Some nodules don't need to be biopsied and are monitored with ultrasound. If a biopsy is needed, fine-needle aspiration (also called needle biopsy or FNA) is recommended. This method uses a thin needle to take small samples of suspicious thyroid nodules. Ultrasound is usually done at the same time to help pinpoint the suspicious areas. Pathology review The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist. Pathologists are physicians with expertise in examining tissues and cells to diagnose disease. By examining the sample under a microscope, the pathologist is able to determine whether the nodule is cancerous, and if so, the cancer type. In certain types of lesions, such as follicular and oncocytic tumors, fine-needle biopsy can identify the nature of the cells, but can't determine if the nodule is cancerous.
3015	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
3016	Your doctor may recommend thyroid hormone replacement therapy with levothyroxine to keep the TSH level low or normal. This is on a case-by-case basis. Because the thyroid continues to make hormones after a lobectomy, hormone replacement therapy isn’t always needed. NIFTP Pathologic examination after surgery may find that the tumor is a noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary‑like nuclear features (NIFTP). A NIFTP is a low-risk, noninvasive thyroid tumor. NIFTP was previously known as the encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer. No further treatment is needed after an NIFTP is surgically removed. Let us know what you think! Please take a moment to complete an online survey about the NCCN Guidelines for Patients. NCCN.org/patients/response Follicular and oncocytic carcinoma Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second most common type of thyroid cancer. Oncocytic carcinoma is uncommon. This type was formerly known as Hürthle cell carcinoma (HCC). Compared to papillary and follicular tumors, oncocytic carcinoma is more likely to spread to lymph nodes by the time it is found. Both follicular and oncocytic thyroid cancers are known for invading blood vessels in and around the thyroid. These cancers can’t be diagnosed with a needle biopsy alone.
3017	A neck ultrasound is also recommended 6 to 12 months after surgery. More information on blood tests is provided on the next page. If you had RAI therapy after total thyroidectomy, you may have whole-body RAI imaging to look for cancer after treatment. It may be helpful for high-risk patients, those with metastases that took up iodine, or those with abnormal blood or ultrasound results. Blood tests Blood testing will measure the levels of the following: Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroglobulin (Tg) h Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg ab) Thyroglobulin (Tg) is only made by thyroid tissue. If the thyroid is removed, there shouldn’t be any Tg in the blood. Therefore, checking the Tg level can serve as a way to monitor for the return of cancer. If the Tg level rises, it could be a sign that further testing is needed to check for recurrence. A small number of people with thyroid cancer make antibodies in response to Tg. These antiTg antibodies in blood can interfere with the Tg level. If the anti-Tg antibody level goes down, it may be a sign that treatment is working. If Neck ultrasound Neck ultrasound is used to monitor for the return of thyroid cancer.
3018	Ask for a copy of the report to have for your records. Your care team uses it to plan the next steps of care. Key points Although most nodules aren't cancerous, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test and ultrasound are recommended if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. Your provider uses the ultrasound results to determine whether a needle biopsy is needed. Biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist. The pathologist determines whether the nodule is cancerous and, if so, the cancer type. 3 Treatments 13 15 16 18 19 21 Surgery Radioactive iodine Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points Surgery is the most common treatment for most thyroid cancers. However, active surveillance may be an option for some very-low-risk cancers. This involves closely monitoring the cancer instead of performing surgery right away. Surgery Surgery is the most effective treatment for thyroid cancer. Surgery may involve removing the entire thyroid gland, or just the half that contains cancer. Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed.
3019	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
3020	Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues.
3021	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
3022	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
3023	This process is called surgical (or pathologic) staging. The stage is used to determine whether more treatment is needed. In stage 1, the tumor has grown into the second or third (muscle) layer of the rectal wall. No further treatment is needed. In stage 2, the tumor has grown through the rectal wall and possibly into nearby tissues or organs. In stage 3, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. More treatment is almost always needed for stage 2 and 3 cancers. Next treatments may include chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or both. More information on chemotherapy is provided next. See page 24 for information on chemoradiation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Chemotherapy regimens used to treat rectal cancer are listed in Guide Any regimen that has “OX” in the name includes oxaliplatin. Oxaliplatin can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy) to your fingers and toes. Symptoms include numbness, cramping, tingling, or pain in these areas. Any regimen that has “IRI” in the name contains irinotecan. Irinotecan tends to cause abdominal cramping, nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
3024	In general, side effects are caused by the death of fast-growing cells, which are found in the intestines, mouth, and blood. As a result, common side effects include: Loss of appetite Nausea Vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) Cisplatin can damage the kidneys. People whose kidneys do not work well may not be able to have cisplatin. An alternative chemotherapy drug may be used. Cisplatin can also cause ringing in the ears (tinnitus) or hearing problems or loss. Ask your treatment team for a list of common and rare side effects of each systemic therapy you are receiving. There are ways to prevent or alleviate some of these effects. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
3025	Topical therapies Topical therapies are treatments that are applied to the skin. 5-fluorouracil (Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex) and imiquimod (Aldara) are prescription creams used to treat early CSCC and actinic keratoses. 5-fluorouracil (also called 5-FU) is chemotherapy applied directly to the skin, unlike most chemotherapy that is put into the bloodstream. A cream called calcipotriene (Sorilux, Dovonex) is often used with 5-fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Calcipotriene is a form of vitamin D that activates the skin’s immune system. Imiquimod belongs to a group of drugs known as immune response modifiers. This cream can help fight abnormal skin growths by activating the immune system to damage abnormal skin cells. Tirbanibulin (Klisyri) is another topical therapy used to treat actinic keratosis. Tirbanibulin is a type of medication called a microtubule inhibitor. It works by killing fast-growing cells, such as the abnormal cells that cause actinic keratoses. It is applied to the face or scalp 1 time a day for 5 days in a row (consecutive) using a single-dose packet with each application. Thickening of the outer layer of skin is known as hyperkeratosis. The goal is to soften and break down this thick top layer before treatment.
3026	Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience side effects. The side effects of systemic therapy vary greatly depending on the medicine(s) used. Most side effects start when treatment starts and stop when it’s over, but some can occur months or even years later. Common side effects include: Tiredness and muscle fatigue Nausea/vomiting Loss of appetite Head and body aches Diarrhea or constipation More severe side effects include lung and breathing problems, damage to organs, high blood pressure, or abnormal bleeding. Longer-term side effects of systemic therapy can include other cancers, heart disease, and infertility. Side effects of systemic therapy If you are prescribed systemic therapy, you may experience some side effects. They include: Tiredness (fatigue) Nausea and vomiting Lung and breathing problems (eg, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain) Damage to major organs including the liver and kidneys Hair loss Mouth sores Body aches Rashes and other skin problems Loss of appetite Diarrhea Constipation Low blood cell counts High blood pressure Abnormal bleeding Side effects of immunotherapy known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs) Not all side effects are listed here.
3027	At this time, preferred first-line regimens for PD-L1–positive cancers are listed below. Bevacizumab (Avastin) might be added to either regimen. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) cisplatin paclitaxel Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) carboplatin + paclitaxel The preferred first-line regimen for all other metastatic cervical cancers is: h Cisplatin paclitaxel bevacizumab Pembrolizumab is an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). Bevacizumab is a type of targeted therapy called a biologic that is designed to work with chemotherapy. Other recommended first-line regimens include different combinations of cisplatin (or carboplatin), topotecan, paclitaxel, and/or bevacizumab. Second-line or beyond If you cannot have more platinum-based chemotherapy, there are other options. Treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is preferred for cancers with one of the following biomarkers: TMB-H PD-L1–positive MSI-H/dMMR For cancers with a biomarker other than those listed above, immunotherapy or targeted therapy may be an option. Biomarkers and their related systemic therapies are listed in Guide For cancers without any of the biomarkers in Guide 1, preferred options include: Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak), and Cemiplimab (Libtayo). If immunotherapy is planned, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients for Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app.
3028	7 What causes CML? 7 What can you do to get the best care? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is caused by a single, specific abnormal gene that is created when a piece of chromosome 9 and a piece of chromosome 22 break off and trade places. The result is a fused gene called BCR::ABL1 and a shortened chromosome 22 called the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. What is CML? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful.
3029	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
3030	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
3031	A standard surgical excision (removal) can be done in a medical office while you are awake. After the area is numbed, the doctor removes the tumor and an area of normal tissue surrounding it with a scalpel blade. The edges of the removed tissue are called the surgical margin. PDEMA can also be used with standard surgical excision. The tissue is then sent for testing. A pathologist examines thin samples of Mohs surgery Mohs surgery is a recommended option for CSCC that has not spread to lymph nodes and is preferred for very high-risk local CSCC. the tissue under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells at the margin. Lymph node dissection If lymph nodes near a squamous cell skin cancer tumor are enlarged, the doctor might biopsy them to check for cancer cells. If the lymph node biopsy shows cancer, sometimes many nodes might be removed in a more extensive surgery called a lymph node dissection. The nodes are then looked at under a microscope for signs of cancer. This type of surgery is more extensive than surgery on the skin and is usually done while you are under general anesthesia (in a deep sleep).
3032	Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot. Clotting is a process or series of events. Proteins, called coagulation factors, are needed for clotting. They are made by the liver. These tests are known together as a coagulation panel or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) panel. It is standard to screen for clotting problems. An impaired clotting process is common in leukemia. This is called coagulopathy. You may have bleeding and bruises or blood clots. HLA typing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) is a protein found on the surface of most cells. It plays an important role in your body’s immune response. HLAs are unique to each person. They mark your body’s cells. Your body detects these markers to tell which cells are yours. In other words, all your cells have the same set of HLAs. Each person’s set of HLAs is called the HLA type or tissue type. HLA typing is a blood test that detects a person’s HLA type. This test is done before an allogeneic (donor) hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT).
3033	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
3034	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Fertility-sparing treatment Fertility-sparing treatment may be an option, if desired, for some stage 1 cancers. This approach involves surgery that does not remove the uterus or ovaries, allowing you the option of natural pregnancy in the future. Early-stage cancer The treatment options in this section apply to: Cancers that are only in the cervix (stage 1) Cancers that have spread to the upper vagina (stage 2A) Surgery is recommended for most early-stage cancers. Treatment with EBRT alone or with chemoradiation may be recommended after surgery. If you cannot have surgery, radiation therapy is usually given instead. Treatment with both external (EBRT) and internal (brachytherapy) is recommended. Options for non–fertility-sparing treatment are provided next according to stage. EBRT or chemoradiation may be needed after surgery. Stage 1A1 Stage 1A1 cancers are typically diagnosed by cone biopsy. If cancer is found at the margins (edges) of the removed tissue and there is no LVSI, you may or may not have more treatment.
3035	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
3036	PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or have immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself. Tumor p16 (HPV) testing HPV testing by p16 is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. It is used to learn more information about your cancer. Testing will be done on a biopsy of your tumor from either your throat, a lymph node, or other sites in your body if needed. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations.
3037	This is often due to dMMR genes. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is often used to treat MSI-H/dMMR tumors. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda), nivolumab (Opdivo), or ipilimumab (Yervoy) might be used for TMB-H tumors in some cases. Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your birth parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Mutation testing uses methods such as nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IDH1 mutation Some gene mutations such as IDH1 can be targeted with specific therapies such as ivosidenib (Tibsovo). Ivosidenib is for those with chondrosarcoma who are prone to have IDH1 mutations. Next-generation sequencing Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a method used to determine a portion of a person’s DNA sequence.
3038	Cancer staging is done when you’re first diagnosed. It may also be done after treatment to confirm that the stage hasn’t changed. How to read a TNM score Let’s say your prostate cancer is given a TNM score of T4, N1, MThis score means that the tumor has grown outside the prostate gland (T4) and has spread to nearby lymph nodes (N1) and to one or more distant parts of the body (M1). Why know your TNM score? For one, it lets you know the extent of your cancer. It also helps characterize your risk for the cancer to spread. Your level of risk helps indicate the most appropriate treatment for you. Measurements and assessments not covered in this book include PSA density, Gleason score, Grade Group, and risk groups. To learn more about these, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Early-Stage Prostate Cancer, which can be found at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. What’s next? After you’ve had all these tests to confirm you have prostate cancer, your care team will discuss your test results and will work with you to develop a plan for treatment.
3039	Information gathered during staging: The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby areas? The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many? Where? The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver? Estrogen receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor? Progesterone receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor? Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2? Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells? Biomarker testing: Does the cancer have any genes, proteins, markers, or mutations that might suggest treatment? TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage breast cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on cancer test results, your doctor will assign a score or number to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread.
3040	These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery. An example might be pNIf you are given cancer drug therapy before surgery, then the stage might add a "y" and look like ypT Anyone can give up; It’s the easiest thing in the world to do, but to hold it together when everyone would expect for you to fall apart, now that is true strength.” Lymph nodes in the head and neck There are over 300 lymph nodes in the head and neck. Most tumors spread to nearby lymph nodes. TNM scores The tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system is used to stage mouth cancer. In this system, the letters T, N, and M describe different areas of cancer growth. Based on imaging and pathology results, a score or number is assigned to each letter. The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage.
3041	Mirror and fiberoptic exam if needed. Screen for depression. Biopsy As needed: • Chest CT (with or without contrast) • CT with contrast and/or MRI with and without contrast of primary tumor and neck • FDG-PET/CT • Endoscopy with examination under anesthesia (EUA) • Dental exam with x-ray (Panorex) or CT without contrast • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling • Screening for hepatitis B diagnosed. It’s important to know the specific type of cancer or where the cancer started, if it is in multiple locations, and if they had genetic testing. Tobacco and alcohol use history Tobacco and alcohol use are known risk factors for developing head and neck cancer and can limit how well treatment works. It can affect survival. You will be asked about your tobacco and alcohol use history and asked to avoid tobacco and limit alcohol use during treatment. Speak to your care team if you have any questions or concerns.
3042	Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Guide 1 Tests for treatment planning Medical history, tobacco and alcohol use history, and physical exam, including complete head and neck exam. Mirror exam if needed. Screen for depression. Nasopharyngeal fiberoptic exam Biopsy of tumor or neck MRI with contrast of collarbone to skull base. CT of skull base and neck may also be done. Imaging for distant metastases with FDG-PET/CT and/or chest CT with contrast As needed: • Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA testing • Dental exam • Nutrition, speech, and swallowing evaluation, and hearing test (audiogram) • Eye and endocrine evaluation • Help to quit smoking • Fertility counseling Family history NPC most often occurs in those from parts of Asia, Native America, and North Africa. Head and neck cancers are not inherited from your biological parents. However, some cancers and other diseases can run in families. Your care team will ask about the health history of family members who are blood relatives. This information is called a family history.
3043	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
3044	For possible tests and procedures, see Guide General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have. A medical history, sometimes called a health history, will help determine which treatment is best for you. Mouth cancer basics The mouth Head and neck cancer Mouth cancer Key points Mouth or oral cavity cancer is a type of cancer that affects the lips, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the gums, the lining inside the cheeks and lips, the floor (bottom) of the mouth under the tongue, the hard palate (bony top of the mouth), the bony ridges that hold the sockets of the teeth, and the small area of the gum behind the wisdom teeth.
3045	PET scan A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is a substance injected into a vein to see where cancer cells are in the body and if they are using sugar produced by your body to grow. Cancer cells show up as bright spots on PET scans. However, not all tumors will appear on a PET scan. Also, not all bright spots are cancer. It is normal for the brain, base of the tongue or tonsil lymphoid tissue, heart, kidneys, and bladder to be bright on PET. Inflammation or infection can also show up as a bright spot. When a PET scan is combined with CT, it is called a PET/CT scan. FDG-PET/CT An FDG-PET/CT uses a radiotracer called fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). It is made of fluoride and a simple form of sugar called glucose. You cannot eat or drink for at least 4 hours before the scan. This scan is most helpful when other imaging results are unclear. It may help find cancer in lymph nodes and distant sites. If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed.
3046	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
3047	Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed.
3048	It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count. There are different doses for cytarabine (Ara-C): Standard High (HiDAC) Intermediate Low (LDAC) The dose you will receive is based on many factors. Ask your care team for the details of your treatment. What is the dose? How often is treatment received? How many treatment cycles are needed? Will I need to spend time in the hospital? If so, for how long? Cytarabine or methotrexate may be used to treat AML in the fluid that surrounds the spine or brain. In this case, it is injected into the spinal fluid. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. Hypomethylating agents Methyl groups are molecules found in DNA. Leukemia cells often have too many methyl groups. These extra groups can block genes from being turned on and off. Hypomethylating agents (HMAs) block methyl groups from binding to DNA. They turn silenced genes back on, which allows leukemic blasts to mature into normal cells. Azacitidine (Vidaza) and decitabine (Dacogen) are HMAs.
3049	Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed.
3050	Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed? Bone marrow is the sponge-like tissue in the center of most bones. Inside your bone marrow are early blood-forming cells called blood (hematopoietic) stem cells. All types of blood cells are created from blood stem cells. At any given time, the bone marrow will have cells in various stages of development, from very young (immature) to almost fully mature. This process is called differentiation. Blood stem cells give rise to red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets (PLTs), which are then released into your bloodstream as needed.
3051	It is common to receive either a placebo with a standard treatment or a new drug with a standard treatment. You will be informed, verbally and in writing, if a placebo is part of a clinical trial before you enroll. Finding a clinical trial In the United States NCCN Cancer Centers NCCN.org/cancercenters The National Cancer Institute (NCI) cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/ clinical-trials/search Worldwide The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) clinicaltrials.gov/ Need help finding a clinical trial? NCI’s Cancer Information Service (CIS) CANCER (6237) cancer.gov/contact Are clinical trials free? There is no fee to enroll in a clinical trial. The study sponsor pays for research-related costs, including the study drug. You may, however, have costs indirectly related to the trial, such as the cost of transportation or child care due to extra appointments. During the trial, you will continue to receive standard cancer care. This care is billed to—and often covered by— insurance. You are responsible for copays and any costs for this care that are not covered by your insurance. Key points Photodynamic therapy, cryotherapy, and topical therapy are treatment options for actinic keratoses (pre-cancerous lesions).
3052	They do not affect estrogen made by the ovaries. Non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors include anastrozole (Arimidex) and letrozole (Femara). Exemestane (Aromasin) is a steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Estrogen receptor (ER) modulators or anti-estrogens prevent hormones from binding to receptors. SERMs and SERDs are types of ER modulators. • Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) block estrogen from attaching to hormone receptors. They include tamoxifen and toremifene (Fareston). • Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) block and destroy estrogen receptors. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) and elacestrant (Orserdu) are SERDs. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists might be used to suppress ovarian hormone or testosterone production. Hormones may be used to treat breast cancer when taken in high doses. It is not known how hormones stop breast cancer from growing. They include ethinyl estradiol, fluoxymesterone, and megestrol acetate (Megace ES). Those who want to have children in the future should be referred to a fertility specialist before starting endocrine therapy to discuss the options. Testosterone For those assigned male at birth whose bodies continue to make testosterone, endocrine therapy includes tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor with testosterone-suppressing therapy. Premenopause If you have menstrual periods, you are in premenopause. In premenopause, the ovaries are the main source of estrogen and progesterone.
3053	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
3054	Lobectomy A lobectomy removes the lobe of the thyroid that contains the cancerous nodule. The tissue connecting the two lobes (the isthmus) is also removed. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the cancerous lobe. Lobectomy may be an option for some small and low-risk differentiated thyroid cancers. Total thyroidectomy A total thyroidectomy removes the entire thyroid gland. Lymph nodes near the thyroid are also removed if they are known or suspected to have cancer. This is called a neck dissection. While under general anesthesia, a small incision is made in the front of the neck to remove the gland. Most people stay in the hospital overnight after surgery. After being discharged, it is important to follow the instructions for at-home care. Contact your care team about any new or worsening side effects. Long-term side effects of removing the thyroid can include: Low levels of calcium in the blood (hypoparathyroidism) Damage to the nerves that control your voice and swallowing Thyroid hormone replacement therapy After a total thyroidectomy, medicine is used to replace the hormones no longer being supplied by the thyroid. This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
3055	Abnormal levels may mean your kidneys and liver are not working as they should. Beta-2 microglobulin is a small protein found on most cells. It is released by cells into the blood by B cells. High levels of beta-2 microglobulin may suggest CLL is growing. Bone marrow tests Bone marrow tests are not often needed to diagnose CLL. However, they may be done to find out what’s causing low blood cell counts. Biomarker tests CLL cells have unique features that can be used to plan treatment specifically for you. These features are called biomarkers. Biomarkers are found with lab tests using either a blood or bone marrow sample: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can show missing parts and extra copies of genetic material called chromosomes. It can detect a biomarker called 17p deletion. DNA sequencing is used to look for mutations in the TP53 and IGHV genes, which control how your cells die when they’re not healthy. A karyotype can show defects in chromosomes. A complex karyotype is 3 or more unrelated changes or deletions in more than one cell. Biomarkers used to select treatment are discussed in Chapter 4: Treatment for CLL.
3056	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
3057	The lungs The lungs are a pair of organs located in the chest. The lungs move important gases in and out of the blood. You breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide (a gas made by cells) from the body. The lungs have sections called lobes. The left lung has 2 lobes and the right lung has 3 lobes. A thin layer of tissue surrounds the lungs called the pleural membrane. This membrane protects the lungs. Two large breathing tubes, called bronchi, connect the windpipe (trachea) to the lungs. There is one tube, called a bronchus, for each lung. Inside the lungs are small tubes (bronchioles) and small air sacs (alveoli). The respiratory system The air you breathe moves through a series of airways. It travels down your throat and through your windpipe (trachea). The windpipe splits into 2 airways called bronchi. Inside the lung, each bronchus branches off into the parts of the lung called lobes. The right lung has 3 lobes and the left lung has 2 lobes. The bronchi divide into smaller airways called the bronchioles. At the end of the bronchioli are sacs called alveoli. From here, oxygen is transferred into your blood.
3058	Removing only a portion of the cervix may be an option for the earliest stage of cervical cancer. In most cases, however, the entire cervix must be removed. While this can sometimes be performed through the vagina, an abdominal incision (cut) is usually needed. When the surgery is performed through a traditional (big) incision through the abdomen, the approach is known as laparotomy. Minimally invasive (also called laparoscopic) surgery involves making only a few small cuts into your body. There is usually less pain and scarring compared to surgery that uses a larger cut through the abdomen. The time it takes to recover is also usually shorter. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped section of the cervix that includes tissue from both the ectocervix and endocervix. It is a recommended treatment option for some small cervical cancers. See Part 2: Testing and staging for more information on cone biopsy. Trachelectomy Trachelectomy is surgery to remove the cervix. The upper part of the vagina and pelvic lymph nodes may also be removed. Trachelectomy is a fertility-sparing surgery. The uterus and ovaries are left intact, allowing for the possibility of natural pregnancy in the future.
3059	For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended. A colonoscopy is recommended 1 year after surgery. If the results are good, your next colonoscopy will take place in 3 years. After that, a colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years. Other local excision results Sometimes more treatment is needed after local excision. Reasons you may need more treatment include: Testing of the removed tissues finds high risk features The tumor is larger than expected and has invaded the muscle layer (a T2 tumor) In either case, the preferred next treatment is transabdominal surgery. See the next page for more information on this method. A second option is chemotherapy combined with radiation. Doctors call this chemoradiation. This treatment approach is normally used for locally advanced cancers. See page 23 for more information. If chemoradiation works well, you might have chemotherapy next to kill any lingering cancer cells. Or, you and your doctor may agree to watch and wait. If there are signs of cancer after chemoradiation, transabdominal resection is recommended. Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors.
3060	During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended.
3061	During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended.
3062	During this time you will have flexible sigmoidoscopy about every 6 months. The first one may be as early as 3 months after ESD. Imaging with endorectal ultrasound or pelvic MRI (with contrast) is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months through the fifth year. Transanal local excision For T1 tumors located at the end of the rectum, removing them through the anus may be an option. This is called transanal local excision. The surgeon cuts through all layers of the rectal wall to remove the cancer and some surrounding normal rectal tissue. Lymph nodes are not removed. Advanced techniques for removing tumors higher in the rectum include transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS). If surgery confirms that the cancer is T1 and the tumor is considered low risk, no further treatment is needed. Surveillance will begin. Surveillance after transanal local excision Proctoscopies and imaging are recommended for 5 years after transanal local excision. These will take place every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 years, then every 6 months the next 3 years. For the imaging, either endorectal ultrasound or MRI with contrast is recommended.
3063	The removed tissue is examined by a specialized doctor called a pathologist. A pathologist is a doctor who specializes in evaluating cells and tissues to diagnose disease. The pathologist looks for abnormal areas, including areas of cancer or pre-cancer. The pathologist also determines the type of cervical cancer, when possible. Cone biopsy Cone biopsy can be both a test and a treatment. It may be used to gather more information about the extent of the cancer after a cervical biopsy. It is also a recommended treatment option for some early cervical cancers. Also known as cervical conization, cone biopsy involves removing a cone-shaped portion of the cervix. The cone-shaped sample includes tissue from both the ectocervix and the endocervical canal. All of the transformation zone—where the ectocervix and endocervix meet—is removed. Most cervical cancers start in this area. Most commonly, a technique called cold knife conization (CKC) is used. In this method a surgical scalpel is used to remove the tissue. In some cases loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) may be performed instead. In LEEP, a thin loop of electrified (heated) wire is used instead of a scalpel to cut out the cervical tissue.
3064	Biomarker testing is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Your care team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: IDHGenes are written with italics like this: IDHWhen a gene or protein is found, it is shown with a plus sign like this: . When a gene or protein has not been found, it is written with a negative sign like this: IDH1-. Ewing sarcoma A cell must make a copy of its chromosomes before dividing into two cells. Sometimes, there are mistakes in the copies. One type of mistake is when parts (DNA) of two chromosomes break off and switch with each other. This is called a translocation. It can result in a fusion of two genes. A translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is written as t(11;22) and is common in Ewing sarcoma.
3065	Most papillary tumors look like long, thin finger-like growths under a microscope. It is also called PRCC. Chromophobe RCC cells are pale, but larger than clear cells, and look different. descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease, or other diseases that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Translocation RCC can be found at all ages but tends to be diagnosed in children or younger adults. These tumors have unique fusions of genes that promote the cancer. Unclassified RCC describes cancer cells that don’t look like any of the subtypes or more than one subtype is present. Rare types of nccRCC Other rare types of nccRCC include the following: Collecting duct RCC (cdRCC) forms in the cells of the collecting ducts or tubules. Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) can be found in young people of African Some other RCC types that have been defined recently include: Clear cell papillary renal cell tumor Fumarate hydratase-deficient RCC ELOC (formerly TCEB1)-mutated RCC Renal cell carcinoma Most kidney cancers arise in cells that line the small tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Sarcomatoid features Almost any type of renal cell carcinoma can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features.
3066	This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches. A wound might be left open (rather than being stitched together) and left to heal by itself, filling in and closing up naturally. This is called secondary intention healing. It could mean you will need regular dressings to the area for up to 6 weeks, but the full time to heal depends on the size, depth, and area of the wound. A linear closure is another common form of wound healing. The surgeon will cut a small amount of extra skin to change the shape of the wound from a circle to a fusiform (an oval that looks like a football) to help the surgeon stitch the wound together in a line. Other wounds may need skin grafts or other types of surgery (such as rearranging skin, known as “flapping”) to heal well and lessen scarring. A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area.
3067	The size of the prostate is measured by transrectal ultrasound or MRI scan. A higher PSA density (above 15 ng/ mL², for example) indicates a greater likelihood of cancer. PSA density also accounts for those with small and very small prostates, who could have prostate cancer even with low PSAs. Grade Group If cancer cells are found in your biopsy samples, further testing can identify your cancer risk. Results from these tests may indicate that the cancer will grow and spread quickly, for example. Or the results may suggest that the cancer will grow very slowly and not spread outside of the prostate at all. This information helps plan the best treatment for your type of cancer. By looking at your biopsy samples, the pathologist will identify certain cancer cell patterns (called Gleason patterns), which are used to calculate your Gleason score, which translates to your Grade Group, which estimates your risk. This can be confusing at first (Gleason patterns? Gleason score? Grade Group?) but it’s not all that complicated in the end. Read on.
3068	Key points Treatment options for bladder cancer depend on the stage and grade of your cancer, your overall health, and your preferences. Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines tumors on the bladder wall and removes them. Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It involves removing the bladder, nearby lymph nodes, and other organs in the pelvis. A urinary diversion is a surgical procedure included with a radical cystectomy. Its purpose is to provide a new way for urine to leave the body. Intravesical therapy is the use of cancer medicine placed directly into the bladder through a catheter. The medicine is slowly put into the bladder using a process called instillation. Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). Chemotherapy affects cancer cells (and other cells) throughout the whole body. All treatments for bladder cancer can cause side effects. Ask your care team about ways to deal with the side effects of treatment. What’s your stage? If you’ve reached this page, then you’ve probably been told the stage of your bladder cancer.
3069	You will lie face-up on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The scan may cause your body to feel a bit warm. Like a CT scan, a contrast agent will be used to make the pictures clearer. MRI scans take longer to complete than CT scans. The full exam can take an hour or more. Tell your doctor if you get nervous in tight spaces. Transvaginal ultrasound If you cannot have MRI of your pelvis, you may have an ultrasound instead. Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. It is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the cervix. In a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe will be inserted into your vagina. This helps your doctor see the cervix and nearby areas more clearly. Transvaginal ultrasound Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of the inside of the body. For a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe is inserted into the vagina. Ultrasounds are generally painless, but you may feel some discomfort when the probe is inserted. Fertility and pregnancy If you want the option of becoming pregnant in the future, talk to your care team about fertility-sparing treatment.
3070	HER2 inhibitors stop growth signals from HER2 from within the cell. HER2 conjugates or antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) deliver cellspecific chemotherapy. They attach to HER2s then enter the cell. Once inside, chemotherapy is released. Your heart will be monitored before and during treatment with trastuzumab. Tests will measure the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), the amount of blood pumping from the left side of the heart. Inhibitors This section is for inhibitors that are different from inhibitors used in HER2-targeted therapy. CDK4/6 inhibitors Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. For hormone receptor-positive , HER2- cancer, taking a CDK4/6 inhibitor with endocrine therapy may help control cancer longer. With all CDK4/6 regimens, those who are premenopausal must also receive ovarian ablation or suppression. CDK4/6 inhibitors include abemaciclib (Verzenio), palbociclib (Ibrance), and ribociclib (Kisqali). mTOR inhibitors mTOR is a cell protein that helps cells grow and divide. Endocrine therapy may stop working if mTOR becomes overactive. mTOR inhibitors are used to get endocrine therapy working again. Everolimus (Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor. Most often, it is taken with exemestane. For some, it may be taken with fulvestrant or tamoxifen.
3071	You can ask your care team for a more complete list and discuss any concerns you might have. More information on the side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors and on managing nausea following treatment is available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase 1 trials study the dose, safety, and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
3072	A commonly used chemotherapy for bladder cancer is cisplatin, which contains the metal platinum. Platinum-based chemotherapy medicines can be effective against bladder cancer but can also damage the kidneys. People with kidney conditions or other health issues may not be able to have chemotherapy or, if possible, may receive non-platinum chemotherapy medicine. Chemotherapy is given in a sequence of treatments called a cycle. A cycle includes a period of treatments (such as once-a-day for a few days) followed by a time of rest (several days or weeks). This treatment cycle is then repeated a few times. For example, you might have 3 to 6 cycles of chemotherapy over 2 to 3 months. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a type of systemic therapy that uses your immune system (your body’s natural defense against infection and disease) to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors are one type of immunotherapy used to treat bladder cancer and other cancers. Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer.
3073	It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer. Take our survey to let us know what we got right and what we could do better. NCCN.org/patients/feedback 3 Mouth cancer staging How mouth cancer is staged TNM scores Mouth cancer stages Key points Cancer staging is used to reflect prognosis and to guide treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. This chapter explains mouth cancer stages. How mouth cancer is staged A cancer stage is a way to describe the extent of the cancer at the time you are first diagnosed. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a staging system to determine how much cancer is in your body, where it is located, and what subtype you have. This is called staging. Based on testing, your cancer will be assigned a stage. Staging helps to predict prognosis and is needed to make treatment decisions. A prognosis is the course your cancer will likely take.
3074	A total thyroidectomy is recommended for papillary cancers that have grown or spread beyond the thyroid—whether into the neck, to nearby lymph nodes, or to distant areas. Tumors larger than 4 centimeters (cm) (about the size of a walnut) and high-risk types of papillary cancer should also be treated with total thyroidectomy. Lymph nodes near the thyroid that are known to have cancer are also removed during surgery. There are other reasons your doctor may recommend a total thyroidectomy. Factors such as whether the neck area was ever treated with radiation therapy will be considered. If the cancer is small and noninvasive, lobectomy may be a treatment option in addition to thyroidectomy. Treatment with lobectomy is preferred if the following criteria are met: You’ve never had radiation therapy The cancer hasn’t spread at all beyond the thyroid. The tumor is 1 to 4 cm in size. The extent of the cancer can't be fully known until the surgeon sees the thyroid, tumor, and surrounding areas first-hand, as well as the results of the pathologic exam of the removed tissues.
3075	Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. In some cases, a sample of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features. Some mutations and proteins might be targeted with specific therapies. Smoking or heavy alcohol use will affect your treatment outcomes and increase treatment toxicity. It is strongly recommended you seek help to stop smoking or vaping. 自 We want your feedback! Our goal is to provide helpful and easy-to-understand information on cancer.
3076	Fertility and reproductive specialists can help you sort through what may be best for your situation. More information on fertility preservation can be found at NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily tasks. Your state of general health will be rated using a PS scale called the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score or the Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS). PS is one factor taken into consideration when choosing a treatment plan. Your preferences about treatment are always important. Bone marrow tests Leukemia starts in the bone marrow. To diagnose AML, samples of bone marrow are usually removed and tested before starting any treatment. The bone marrow sample should be reviewed by a pathologist who is an expert in the diagnosis of AML. This review is often referred to as histology, histopathology, or hematopathology review. The pathologist will note the overall appearance and the size, shape, and type of cells. Tests will be done on the biopsied cells.
3077	Numbing medicine will be sprayed in your nose. This procedure typically takes less than 1 minute. Direct laryngoscopy is a more detailed exam performed under general anesthesia in an operating room. It uses a scope called a laryngoscope placed in the back of your throat. This procedure allows the doctor to see deeper in the throat and to take a tissue sample for a biopsy. The purpose of direct laryngoscopy is to identify the primary (main) tumor and determine if it is resectable (can be removed with surgery). Esophagoscopy In an esophagoscopy, a device is guided down the throat into the esophagus. It is performed under anesthesia in an operating room. This allows the doctor to examine your esophagus (swallowing tube) for abnormal growths. Bronchoscopy During a bronchoscopy, a device is inserted through the nose or mouth to examine the inside of your airway, including the trachea and bronchi. Bronchoscopy may be used to detect cancer or to perform some treatment procedures. It is done under anesthesia to make you more comfortable. Panendoscopy During a panendoscopy, different types of endoscopes are passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy, pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy.
3078	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
3079	Ask the hard questions. Start a notebook and take it to all appointments to note what is said and how you are doing along the way. I even asked if I could record some of those early appointments so I could play them back later. – Thom Anal cancer survivor Clinical trials A clinical trial is a type of medical research study. After being developed and tested in a laboratory, potential new ways of fighting cancer need to be studied in people. If found to be safe and effective in a clinical trial, a drug, device, or treatment approach may be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Everyone with cancer should carefully consider all of the treatment options available for their cancer type, including standard treatments and clinical trials. Talk to your doctor about whether a clinical trial may make sense for you. Phases Most cancer clinical trials focus on treatment. Treatment trials are done in phases. Phase I trials study the safety and side effects of an investigational drug or treatment approach. They also look for early signs that the drug or approach is helpful.
3080	The radiation passes through skin and other tissue to reach the tumor. All types of EBRT are conformal, which means that the radiation beams are shaped to the tumor. What makes IMRT unique compared to other forms of EBRT is that it uses many small beams of different intensities (strengths). This allows a high dose of radiation to be targeted at the tumor while limiting the amount of radiation to the surrounding normal tissue. With IMRT it is possible to reduce radiation to important nearby organs and structures, such as external genitalia and hip joints. This can help reduce treatment-related side effects. Radiation therapy is given in small doses, called fractions. As part of chemoradiation for anal cancer, radiation is typically given Monday through Friday for 5 to 6 weeks (25 to 30 treatment sessions). A planning session, called simulation, is needed before treatment begins. If IMRT is planned, you will most likely lie on your back with your knees out to the side (“frog-legged”) for simulation and for treatment. Pictures of the cancer sites will be obtained with a CT scan.
3081	Create a medical binder A medical binder or notebook is a great way to organize all of your records in one place. Make copies of blood tests, imaging results, and reports about your specific type of cancer. It will be helpful when getting a second opinion. Choose a binder that meets your needs. Consider a zipper pocket to include a pen, small calendar, and insurance cards. Create folders for insurance forms, medical records, and tests results. You can do the same on your computer. Use online patient portals to view your test results and other records. Download or print the records to add to your binder. Organize your binder in a way that works for you. Add a section for questions and to take notes. Bring your medical binder to appointments. You never know when you might need it! General health tests Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Tell your doctor about any symptoms you have.
3082	A genetic counselor Quitting smoking is hard. Getting help can improve your chances of quitting for good. will also help you interpret the results of these tests. (Ask your care team or go to findageneticcounselor.com) For bladder cancer, the most common germline mutations are found in these genes: CDKN2A, FGFR3, PIK3CA, ERBBIf you have an inherited risk, your cancer might require additional testing or specialized treatment. Quitting smoking Smoking increases the risk for bladder cancer. People who smoke are 3 times more likely to die from bladder cancer than people who don’t smoke. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Your family and friends could also have a greater risk because your secondhand smoke may increase their risk for bladder cancer, too. Quitting smoking may reduce your risk of getting cancer and other serious diseases. It can also help treatments for bladder cancer work better. Key points Tests of your blood and urine can show if something in your body isn’t working right. This may be a clue that you have a serious illness, such as cancer. Cystoscopy uses a viewing device inserted through the urethra to look for cancer inside the bladder.
3083	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
3084	Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda). Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy waves— such as x-rays—to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. The type of radiation therapy usually used for bladder cancer is called external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). In EBRT, a large machine aims radiation at the tumor area. Radiation therapy can be given alone but is more often given with other bladder cancer treatments: Chemoradiation Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are often used together to treat bladder cancer. When given together, they work better than they do alone. This is called chemoradiation or chemoradiotherapy. Like many cancer treatments, chemoradiation works better for certain people than for others. Trimodal therapy Trimodal therapy refers to a combination of three treatments: TURBT to remove all visible cancer, followed by radiation and chemotherapy given together (chemoradiation). In certain people with bladder cancer, trimodal therapy can be used instead of bladder removal surgery (radical cystectomy). This is why trimodal therapy is referred to as a "bladder preserving" treatment. Clinical trials Therapy may also be given as part of a clinical trial.
3085	Though orchiectomy is a surgical procedure, it’s still considered hormone therapy because it removes the primary source of testosterone: the testicles. While drug hormone therapy can be reversed when the medication is stopped, orchiectomy is permanent and can’t be reversed. Surgical removal of the testicles is much less common these days because systemic Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a systemic (whole-body) treatment that adds, blocks, or removes hormones. A hormone is a natural chemical made by a gland in the body. Its job is to activate cells or organs. Male hormones are called androgens. The main androgen is testosterone. Most of the testosterone in the body is made by the testicles. Testosterone helps produce sperm, among other functions. But testosterone also helps prostate cancer grow. A type of hormone therapy called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can stop your body from making testosterone or block cancer cells from using testosterone. The What is ADT? Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) brings testosterone down to a very low level. ADT treatments include: LHRH agonist (goserelin, leuprolide or triptorelin) LHRH agonist anti-androgen (nilutamide, flutamide, or bicalutamide) LHRH antagonist (degarelix or relugolix) Surgical castration hormone therapy is often just as effective at blocking testosterone.
3086	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
3087	Checkpoint inhibitors block the natural braking mechanisms in the body to allow your immune system to better identify and fight the cancer. The checkpoint inhibitors for bladder cancer include: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Opdivo (nivolumab) Bavencio (avelumab) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a systemic treatment that can pick out and attack certain types of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is more often used for people with specific gene mutations. If you don’t have the mutation that the medicine “targets,” this treatment is unlikely to help. Targeted therapies for certain types of bladder cancer include: Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv), also known as an antibody-drug conjugate, targets and attaches itself to a specific protein, Nectin-4, found on the surface of bladder cancer cells. Balversa (erdafitinib) is a targeted therapy used for people whose bladder cancer is due to specific mutations in the FGFR3 gene. Trodelvy (sacituzumab govitecan-hziy) seeks and latches onto the protein Trop-2, found in large numbers on cancer cells. Because targeted therapy doesn’t harm normal cells as much as chemotherapy, the side effects tend to be different. Notably, the preferred therapy for metastatic bladder cancer is a combination of a targeted therapy (Padcev) and an immunotherapy (Keytruda).
3088	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
3089	But you might not have symptoms until the tumor has grown large or the cancer has spread. Common symptoms include: Feeling bloated Heartburn and indigestion Pain or pressure in the pelvis or belly Trouble eating or feeling full fast Having to urinate often or urgently Pain during sex These symptoms can also be caused by hormonal changes or other common health problems. Ovarian cancer is more likely to be the cause if the symptoms: h Began less than 1 year ago, h Occur more than 12 days per month, and Are becoming more severe over time. If your provider suspects ovarian cancer based on your symptoms, you will have testing as described in this chapter. Testing helps determine the clinical (pre-treatment) stage. The clinical stage provides a best guess of how far the cancer has spread. It is a best guess because surgery is needed in order to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Testing also helps determine whether surgery first is the best treatment. Having surgery first may not be possible based on the size and location of the tumor, or because of other health factors.
3090	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
3091	Depending on the trial, you may continue to receive standard cancer care. The standard therapy is billed to—and often covered by—insurance. You’re responsible for copays and any costs for this care that aren’t covered by your insurance. NCCN experts recommend that everyone with primary CNS lymphoma should consider joining a clinical trial for treatment. Steroids Corticosteroids (often just called steroids) can shrink lymphomas and decrease swelling in the brain. This can rapidly reduce the signs and symptoms of the lymphoma. However, steroids lose their effectiveness and cause side effects when given long-term. So steroids are only given for a short period of time usually in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, steroid therapy shouldn’t start until after you have a biopsy and get a diagnosis. This is because steroids can change the appearance of lymphoma cells, making it difficult for the pathologist to reliably diagnose the disease. Side effects of steroids Common side effects of steroids are feeling hungry, trouble sleeping, slow wound healing, upset stomach, mood changes, and swelling in the ankles, feet, and hands. Steroids may also significantly increase blood sugar levels. Most side effects of steroids go away after the drug is stopped.
3092	If possible, seek care at a center with experience in treating brain lymphomas. Not everyone with primary CNS lymphoma can be cured, but all can be treated. Treatment can slow down the lymphoma’s growth, reduce symptoms, and prolong life. The main treatments for primary CNS lymphoma include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, or a combination of these treatments. Another recommended option is receiving treatment in a clinical trial. A message to caregivers and loved ones This book is for you, too. This book will help you understand this disease and the challenges it presents. People with lymphoma in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) commonly develop problems with brain function. This can show itself in multiple ways, such as slower thinking, memory loss, difficulty moving or walking, trouble speaking, inability to do everyday activities, changes in behavior, losing one’s sense of self, and other problems. Helping a person with primary CNS lymphoma can be challenging and time-consuming. You may be providing physical, mental, emotional, and hands-on support. You may be taking the patient to appointments, helping to lessen side effects, and even assisting with treatment decisions. Gather as much help as you can.
3093	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
3094	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
3095	About basal cell skin cancer What is basal cell skin cancer? How is basal cell skin cancer treated? What can you do to get the best care? Basal cell skin cancer, also known as basal cell carcinoma (BCC), is the most common type of skin cancer. About 3 million cases of basal cell skin cancer are diagnosed every year in the United States. The good news is it can be cured in most cases. Treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Keep reading to find out more. What is basal cell skin cancer? Basal cell skin cancer is the most common of all skin cancer types. If caught early, it is easily treatable and curable. This is because it rarely metastasizes (spreads). Skin cancers often occur in the top layer of the skin (epidermis) and less commonly in the middle layer of the skin (dermis). The epidermis is made up of basal cells and other cells. Basal cell skin cancer occurs when some basal cells become abnormal and grow out of control. This cancer usually develops in areas exposed to the sun, including the face, head, neck, arms, legs, and trunk. But it can occur anywhere on the body.
3096	Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger.
3097	RAI therapy may be used in the following situations: To lower the chances that a high-risk cancer returns after treatment To treat thyroid cancer that has spread within the body Shortly after thyroidectomy for some lower-risk cancers, using lower-dose iodine-131 (also known as remnant ablation) RAI therapy is used after total thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancers that take up iodine. It is generally only recommended for cancers at higher risk of coming back. RAI isn’t effective against medullary or anaplastic thyroid cancer. How is it given? RAI therapy comes in liquid or pill form and is taken by mouth. You may be asked to eat a diet low in iodine for 1 to 2 weeks before starting this treatment. You need a high level of TSH for RAI therapy. Thyroid hormone replacement may be stopped for a few weeks beforehand. If this isn’t recommended for you, hormone injections of thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen) can be used to increase the TSH level. Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging.
3098	A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous. A high TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are low. A low TSH level usually means that the thyroid hormone levels are high. This is called hyperthyroidism or overactive thyroid. Your provider may order a radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake test. Ultrasound Ultrasound is the most common imaging technique used to look for thyroid cancer. It uses sound waves to form images showing the size, shape, and location of a thyroid nodule. An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is brief and painless. It is usually done lying down. A Ultrasound An ultrasound of the thyroid and neck is one of the first tests ordered if a thyroid nodule is known or suspected. hand-held device called an ultrasound probe is used. After a gel is applied to the skin, the probe is moved back and forth over the thyroid area. If ultrasound finds any suspicious lymph nodes in the neck, further imaging with CT or MRI is recommended. A substance called contrast is used to make the pictures clearer.
3099	This is called thyroid hormone replacement therapy. It is needed lifelong in all people after total thyroidectomy. After a lobectomy, about 1 in 3 people need thyroid hormone therapy. Levothyroxine (eg, Levoxyl; Synthroid) is the most commonly used thyroid hormone replacement therapy. The goal for most people is to keep the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the low normal range. For higher risk thyroid cancers, or if there are signs of recurrence, the TSH level is kept lower than the normal range (suppressed). This helps prevent thyroid cancer cells from growing or returning. Suppression is an important part of cancer therapy for most differentiated thyroid cancers. Levothyroxine is taken as a pill once a day. It must be taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 mintutes prior to eating a meal. If not, it won't be adequately absorbed into the blood. Finding the right dose can take some trial and error. If the dose isn't optimal, common side effects include: Anxiety Trouble sleeping Racing heart (with or without an abnormal heartbeat) Sweating Blood tests are used to check the TSH level on a regular basis during thyroid replacement therapy.
3100	Tell your provider if you have a personal or family history of breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer. Key points The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. It makes hormones that help regulate metabolism and other body functions. Thyroid cancers start as small, often round areas of abnormal growth called nodules. Most don’t cause symptoms and are benign. Thyroid cancer is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. The most well-known risk factors are radiation exposure and a family history of thyroid cancer. 2 Testing 9 TSH test 9 Ultrasound 10 Biopsy 11 Key points If a thyroid nodule is found or suspected, a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) blood test and an ultrasound of the thyroid and neck are needed. Your doctor uses the results to decide whether a biopsy is needed. TSH test Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone made by the pituitary gland, located near the base of the brain. TSH controls the hormones made by the thyroid. A TSH blood test can't diagnose thyroid cancer. The level is checked to learn if the nodule is producing thyroid hormone. Nodules that make thyroid hormone are rarely cancerous.
3101	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
3102	It affects children ages 5 and under, though it is most often found in infants. Neuroblastoma can spread to other parts of the body, including the bones. Pheochromocytoma – This type of tumor begins in the adrenal medulla and is characterized by symptoms of high blood pressure, headache, rapid heartbeat, and sweating. Most pheochromocytomas are benign, but can be cancerous. Adenoma – This is the most common type of adrenal gland tumor, also referred to as adrenocortical adenoma. It is a noncancerous tumor that can be functioning or nonfunctioning. If an adenoma is small and/or does not produce excessive hormones, and is not causing symptoms, it may not need Types Adrenal tumor categories are further broken down into types. They include the following: Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an adrenal cancer that starts in one or both of the adrenal glands. It can occur at any age. But it’s most likely to affect children ages 5 and under, and adults in their 40s and 50s. If caught early, adrenal cancer can be cured. However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence.
3103	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
3104	The results help determine whether treatment with certain targeted therapies is an option. The results can also be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials. Some doctors order biomarker testing early in the course of treatment. Many doctors wait and order it only if the cancer returns or spreads. Testing should be performed on tumor tissue removed during a biopsy or surgery when possible. Otherwise, a sample of blood may be tested instead. Other names for this testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, nextgeneration sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, and comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP). Testing for PD-L1 expression is recommended for everyone with recurrent, progressive, or metastatic cervical cancer. If the PD-L1 level exceeds a set cutoff point, the cancer is considered PD-L1-positive. If needed, treatment with certain targeted therapies or immunotherapies may be an option for PD-L1–positive tumors. The biomarkers listed below are less common in cervical cancer but should still be tested for.
3105	PDL1 expression is measured using a combined positive score (CPS), which measures the immune proteins in your tumor and your immune system. If your cancer expresses this protein and has a CPS of at least 1 percent or higher, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, or have immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy by itself. Tumor p16 (HPV) testing HPV testing by p16 is recommended for everyone diagnosed with throat (oropharyngeal) cancer. It is used to learn more information about your cancer. Testing will be done on a biopsy of your tumor from either your throat, a lymph node, or other sites in your body if needed. Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations.
3106	Systemic therapy may be given in addition to radiation. If systemic therapy is planned, platinum-based chemotherapy is a recommended option for use with radiation. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may damage critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. If you are eligible, immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a recommended treatment option. Enrolling in a clinical trial for systemic therapy is also an option.  See Part 5: When treatment is over for information on monitoring and follow-up care. Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has not spread to nearby lymph nodes is known as “local”. Local CSCC is most often treated with surgery. Key features of the cancer will be considered to determine if it is a low-, high- or very high-risk CSCC. This is called a risk assessment. The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. If the tumor has grown into a nerve or group of nerves, usually seen under the microscope, it is a high-risk or very highrisk cancer. The tumor grade is a rating of how fast your doctors expect the cancer to grow and spread.
3107	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
3108	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses this protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. Tumor HPV testing Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer.
3109	The vermillion lip is the area where the skin and the lip meet on the outside of the mouth. Information for treatment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the vermilion lip can be found in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Squamous Cell Skin Cancer at NCCN.org/ patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Key points Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer is a type of head and neck cancer. Head and neck cancers are a group of cancers that arise in the head or neck area of the body. Cancer treatment is based on the tumor location and cancer stage. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of mouth cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucous membranes of the mouth. SCC is the focus of this book.
3110	Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well. Abnormal levels may also be caused by the spread of cancer or by other diseases. This test can also provide information about nutrient intake, such as protein levels. This can help guide treatment decisions. The liver is an organ that does many important jobs, such as removing toxins from your blood. Liver function tests measure chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low may be a sign of liver damage or cancer spread. Tumor markers A tumor marker is a substance found in body tissue or fluid that may be a sign of cancer. Along with other information, tumor markers can help diagnose ovarian cancer and monitor response to treatment. A cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) test is the most common tumor marker test for ovarian cancer. High levels of this protein in the blood may be a sign of ovarian or other cancers. A CA-125 test alone cannot diagnose ovarian cancer. Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise.
3111	After treatment the port can be easily removed. Once the port is removed, the skin will heal. Chemotherapy medicine can also be slowly injected into the abdomen. This is called intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy. When given this way, higher doses of the drugs are delivered directly to the cancer cells in the belly area. IP chemotherapy is given through a thin tube called a catheter. The catheter is usually connected to a port placed inside the abdomen during surgery. Monitoring during chemotherapy Your doctor will monitor how well the chemotherapy is working and assess for side effects. Expect to have a physical exam every 1 to 3 cycles. A pelvic and rectovaginal exam may be done at the same time. Imaging and blood tests are ordered as needed. Testing for CA-125 or other tumor markers may be performed before each cycle of chemotherapy. Side effects of chemotherapy Common side effects of chemotherapy include: Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Mouth sores Hair loss Fatigue Increased risk of infection Bleeding or bruising easily Nerve damage (neuropathy) The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the specific medicines being used, the dose, and other factors.
3112	In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. Key points Results from imaging studies and a biopsy will determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results. Please discuss your results with your health care provider. A medical history and physical exam inform your care team about your overall health. Your overall health may guide the best treatment for your cancer. Head and neck cancer and its treatment can affect the health of your jaw, teeth, and gums. Tell your dentist about your head and neck cancer and keep up with regular dental cleanings and checkups. Treatment can affect fertility. Talk to your care team about your concerns and if you are planning a pregnancy. Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A biopsy removes a sample of tissue or fluid for testing. h A sample of your tumor or blood may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations, protein levels, or other molecular features.
3113	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
3114	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
3115	Tumor mutational burden When there are 10 or more mutations per million base pairs of tumor DNA, it is called tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H). Metastatic or unresectable TMB cancers are often treated using immune checkpoint inhibitors that target the proteins called programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Tumor mutation testing Tumor mutation testing or tumor genomic aberration testing uses a sample of your tumor or blood to see if the cancer cells have any specific DNA mutations. This is a different type of DNA testing than the genetic testing for mutations you may have inherited from your biological parents. In tumor mutation testing, only the tumor is tested and not the rest of your body. Some mutations can be targeted with specific therapies. If you feel something different around your neck, glands, tongue, or mouth area, please don’t wait! Go see an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor.” Key points Results from imaging studies and biopsy may help determine your treatment plan. Often, information is collected over time, even as treatment begins. Online portals are a great way to access your test results.
3116	These antigens are proteins that can be found on the surface of or inside white blood cells. Certain biomarkers are targeted in AML treatment. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a special staining process that involves adding a chemical marker to cells. The cells are then studied using a microscope. IHC looks for the immunophenotype of cells from a biopsy or tissue sample. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy Samples of bone and liquid bone marrow are removed in a biopsy. Testing for AML biomarker and genetic changes Biomarker and genetic tests are used to learn more about your subtype of AML, to target treatment, and to determine the likely path the cancer will take called a prognosis. This genetic testing is different from family history genetic testing or genetic cancer risk testing. This testing looks for changes only in the leukemia cells that have developed over time, and not changes in the rest of the body’s cells. It is sometimes called molecular testing, tumor profiling, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Inside our cells are DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. These molecules are tightly packaged into what is called a chromosome. Chromosomes contain most of the genetic information in a cell.
3117	A pathologist will measure how many cells have estrogen and/ or progesterone receptors and the number of receptors inside each cell. Biomarker testing A sample from a biopsy of your tumor may be tested to look for specific DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) mutations/alterations, protein levels, or other molecular features. This information is used to choose the best treatment for you. It is sometimes called molecular testing or tumor profiling, tumor sequencing, gene expression profiling, or genomic testing. Biomarker testing includes tests of genes or their products (proteins). It identifies the presence or absence of mutations and certain proteins that might suggest treatment. Proteins are written like this: BRCA. Genes are written with italics like this: BRCA. HER2 and hormone receptor status are part of biomarker testing. Your treatment team will recommend the best types of biomarker testing that are important for you. Tumor markers Your blood or biopsy tissue may be tested for proteins. Examples of some tumor markers in breast cancer include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 15-3, and CA An increase in the level of certain tumor markers could mean that the cancer has grown or spread (progressed).
3118	Often, not all information is available at the initial evaluation. More information can be gathered as treatment begins. Doctors may explain your cancer stage in different ways than described next. Staging includes: Anatomic – based on extent of cancer as defined by tumor size (T), lymph node status (N), and distant metastasis (M). Prognostic – includes anatomic TNM plus tumor grade. The prognostic stage also includes the assumption that you are treated with the standard-of-care approaches. Prognostic stages are divided into clinical and pathologic. Cancer staging is often done twice, before and after surgery. Staging after surgery provides more specific and accurate details about the size of the cancer and lymph node status. Clinical stage Clinical stage (c) is the rating given before any treatment. It is based on a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. An example might look like cN2 or cMIn throat cancer, the clinical (before surgery) stage is based on imaging results. These tests are done before any treatment as part of an initial diagnosis. Surgery is needed to know exactly how much cancer is in the body. Pathologic stage Pathologic stage (p) or surgical stage is determined by examining tissue removed during surgery.
3119	Tumors often release molecules that can be used as clues for finding and learning about the cancer. This information helps figure out the likelihood that your cancer could spread to other parts of the body. It can also help predict whether the cancer could transform into a more aggressive type. Importantly, targeted therapies (PARP inhibitors, for example) can be used against cancers that have particular molecular tumor markers. So the testing looks for specific abnormalities in a number of genes involved in DNA repair, including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, FANCA, and others. Tumor staging Tumors come in different shapes and sizes. So it’s not easy to compare one tumor to another. To solve this problem, cancer experts created the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system to describe any tumor. It’s based on the results of your imaging scans, biopsies, and blood tests.
3120	BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment. Everyone diagnosed with ovarian cancer should have the tumor tested for mutations in the BRCA genes, and in other similar genes important in DNA repair. This is different than genetic testing of the blood for inherited (germline) BRCA mutations. Mutations in the tumor itself are known as somatic or simply “tumor” mutations. BRCA mutations are a form of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). This means that if you have a BRCA mutation, the cancer is also homologous recombination deficient or HRD positive. However, you can also have an HRD-positive tumor without a BRCA mutation. Other changes in the tumor’s DNA can make it homologous recombination deficient. The tumor's BRCA and HRD status are used to guide decisions about maintenance therapy after initial treatment. Other biomarkers The timing of testing for the biomarkers described next can vary. Some providers test for these (in addition to BRCA) early in the treatment process. Others may only test for BRCA and wait to see if therapies that require other biomarkers are needed. However, testing for these biomarkers is generally recommended for ovarian cancer that returns after treatment (recurrent).
3121	For paracentesis, a long, thin needle is inserted through the skin of the belly to remove a sample of fluid. The biopsy samples are sent to a pathologist for testing. A pathologist is a doctor who is an expert in testing cells to find disease. The pathologist views the samples with a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the cells are cancerous, the pathologist notes their appearance and other features. Prior surgery or biopsy The cancer may have been found during a surgery or biopsy performed by another doctor. In this case, your treatment team will need to review the prior surgery and testing results. A pathologist will examine the tumor tissue with a microscope to make sure it is ovarian cancer. Your doctors will also want to know if any cancer was left in your body after surgery. Family history and genetic testing Ovarian cancer usually occurs for unknown reasons. However, about 1 in 6 ovarian cancers is caused by mutations (changes) in genes that are passed down from parent to child. This is called hereditary ovarian cancer. It is most often caused by mutations in either breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) or breast cancer gene 2 (BRCA2).
3122	Health problems that are not cancer, such as endometriosis and diverticulitis, can raise your CA-125 level. Some ovarian cancers don’t cause CA-125 to rise. Your blood may also be tested for the following tumor markers. These may be found in higherthan-normal amounts in people with less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs). Inhibin (typically inhibin A and inhibin B) Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CA 19-9 HE4 Biomarker testing Biomarkers are features of the tumor that can help guide your treatment. They are often mutations (changes) in the DNA of the cancer cells. Testing for biomarkers involves analyzing a piece of tumor tissue in a lab or testing a sample of blood. The results can be used to determine whether you can join certain clinical trials, and whether you may benefit from specific maintenance therapies. Other names for biomarker testing include molecular testing, tumor profiling, genomic testing, tumor gene testing, next-generation sequencing (NGS), mutation testing, liquid biopsy, and precision oncology. BRCA and HRD A BRCA mutation is the most important biomarker used to plan ovarian cancer treatment.
3123	In this procedure, a thin, hollow needle is inserted into the brain to remove a sliver of the tumor. The sample is sent to a lab to be tested for cancer cells. Your tumor type If molecular testing was performed on your biopsy sample, the pathology report should reveal your tumor type. It’s important to identify the exact type of tumor you have to predict the course of your disease and plan your treatment. There are 3 ways to classify a glioma: Histology – The first way to classify the tumor is by looking at it under a microscope. This is called histology. For instance, a glioma with cells that look like astrocytes is likely to be an astrocytoma. Grade – Another way to classify a tumor is by grade, which is a rating of how abnormal its cells are. The more abnormal its cells, the faster and farther the tumor is likely to grow. Biomarkers – A glioma is also identified by its biomarkers. A biomarker is a molecular characteristic such as a genetic mutation. Each type of glioma has its own biomarker or set of biomarkers. For example, an astrocytoma may have a mutation in the IDH gene.
3124	Testing for CSCC could include a full health history, an examination of any lesions, and a skin biopsy to remove a sample and test it for cancer. Imaging scans will also be done if cancer goes deeper into the skin or has spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells can travel through blood and lymph fluid to form tumors in other parts of the body. If spread to lymph nodes is suspected, your doctor will do a lymph node biopsy. 2 Types of treatments Who is on my care team? Superficial treatments Surgery Radiation therapy Systemic therapy Clinical trials Key points This chapter describes the types of treatment you may have for squamous cell skin cancer. The best treatment for you will depend on the extent of the cancer, whether surgery is a suitable option, and your personal preferences. Not everyone will receive the same treatment. Who is on my care team? After being diagnosed with squamous cell skin cancer, knowing what to do next can be confusing. Aside from your oncologist (your cancer doctor), there are others who may be involved in your cancer care.
3125	In EBRT, a beam of radiation is directed at the tumor from a machine. The two most common types of external beam radiation for CSCC are electrons and photons. Electrons are used to treat superficial tumors. Photons are used to treat deeper, more invasive tumors. In brachytherapy, a radiation source is placed close to or in direct contact with the tumor for a short period of time. Uses for radiation therapy Radiation therapy is an option for people after resection (surgery) of their cancer, or for those who cannot or choose not to have surgery. However, radiation therapy can be very effective for small tumors, and for tumors in areas such as the head and neck. Radiation therapy should not be used in people who have certain genetic conditions that put them at higher risk of skin cancer caused by radiation, such as basal cell nevus syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. It may also not be appropriate for some people who have connective tissue diseases, such as lupus or scleroderma. The same area generally should not be treated with radiation more than once. When CSCC grows in a radiated area, it usually needs to be removed with surgery.
3126	Chemotherapy may follow. Transabdominal surgery Transabdominal surgery is recommended for tumors that have invaded the muscle layer of the rectal wall. In staging terms, these are T2 tumors. Abdominal surgery is also a recommended option for: smaller (T1) tumors, and some larger (T3) cancers that haven't spread to lymph nodes. This method involves cutting into the abdomen to reach and remove the rectal tumor, some surrounding healthy tissue, and nearby lymph nodes. A pathologist examines the removed tissue and determines the cancer stage. The type of transabdominal surgery performed depends on the location of the tumor and the extent of the cancer. At least 12 lymph nodes should be removed during all types of transabdominal surgery. Low anterior resection A low anterior resection (LAR) is a type of transabdominal surgery used for tumors in the mid to upper rectum. In addition to the rectal tumor, part or all of the last section of the colon is removed. When possible, the colon is connected to the remaining rectum. This is called a colorectal anastomosis (reconnection). Otherwise the colon may be attached directly to the anus. This is called a coloanal anastomosis.
3127	Tunica adventitia – outermost layer, made of connective tissue Upper esophagus The upper part of the esophagus is made of striated muscle. Striated muscle generates force and contracts. It is under your control (voluntary). Middle esophagus The middle part of the esophagus is a mixture of striated and smooth muscle. Lower esophagus The lower part of the esophagus consists only of smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is not under your control. It is involuntary, like a reflex. Esophagogastric junction The esophagogastric junction (EGJ) is the place where the stomach and the esophagus meet, found just beneath the diaphragm. It is also called the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). It separates the contents of the esophagus from the contents of the stomach (acid). Esophageal cancer Cancer of the esophagus (or esophageal cancer) starts when cells in the epithelium of the esophagus begin to grow out of control. There are 2 types of esophageal cancer: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) starts in the thin, flat cells found in the inner lining of the esophagus. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is often found in the upper and middle esophagus but can occur in the lower esophagus as well.
3128	MRI may be used before a biopsy to target areas suspicious for cancer. Or it may be used after diagnosis to figure out whether the cancer has advanced outside the prostate or into the lymph nodes. It can help to plan treatment or to decide whether active surveillance is appropriate. MRI can also be used after treatment to check if the cancer has come back (recurrence). An MRI scanner is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. An MRI machine makes a lot of noise but you can wear headphones or earplugs and listen to music. You may also be given a contrast agent (sometimes called contrast dye) before the scan. Contrast is used to make blood vessels, organs, and other tissues stand out more clearly in the images. The contrast agent is injected into the bloodstream and flushed out in urine. An appointment for an MRI scan can take about 1 to 2 hours, including 30 to 60 minutes of actual scanning time. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still.
3129	In some cases, positron emission tomography (PET) may be combined with a CT or MRI. CT, MRI, and PET are described below. CT takes many pictures of areas inside of the body using x-rays. A computer combines the x-rays to make one detailed picture. The picture is saved for later viewing by a radiologist. You will lie face-up on a table that moves through a tunnel-like machine. A substance called contrast will be used to make the pictures clearer. Before the CT scan, you will be asked to drink a large glass of oral contrast. A contrast agent may also be injected into your vein. It may cause you to feel flushed or get hives. Rarely, serious allergic reactions occur. Tell your doctors if you have had bad reactions to contrast in the past. You will be alone during the scan, but a technician will be right outside the room. You may hear buzzing or clicking during the scan. MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to make pictures of areas inside the body.
3130	It’s a procedure that removes tumors through the urethra without having to cut into the abdomen. The tumor can then be tested to provide a more detailed diagnosis. TURBT is done in an operating room in a clinic or hospital. You’ll be given anesthesia to put you to sleep. The urologist then guides an instrument with a small cutting device through the urethra and into the bladder. The instrument is used to examine and remove the tumor from the bladder lining. The goals of TURBT are to: Confirm the initial bladder cancer diagnosis. Take a sample of the bladder wall to see if the tumor has invaded the muscle layer. Remove all the visible tumor. After the procedure, most people can go home the same day. But you’ll need a few days to rest and recover. You may feel pain or burning when you urinate and have blood in your urine for the following 2 weeks or so. Another TURBT procedure may be needed about 2 to 6 weeks after the first one. The second TURBT is done to make sure all the tumor is removed.
3131	Chemotherapy Systemic therapy is drug therapy that works throughout the body. It is used before surgery to shrink the tumor or reduce the amount of cancer (called cancer burden). Preoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given before surgery. It is also called neoadjuvant therapy. Postoperative is systemic (drug) treatment given after surgery. It is also called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy kills fast-dividing cells throughout the body, including cancer cells and some normal cells. More than one chemotherapy may be used to treat inflammatory breast cancer. When only one drug is used, it’s called a single agent. A combination or multi-agent regimen is the use of two or more chemotherapy drugs. Warnings about supplements and drug interactions You might be asked to stop taking or avoid certain herbal supplements when on a systemic therapy. Some supplements can affect the ability of a drug to do its job. This is called a drug interaction. It is critical to speak with your care team about any supplements you may be taking. Some examples include: Turmeric Gingko biloba Green tea extract St. John’s Wort Antioxidants Certain medicines can also affect the ability of a drug to do its job.
3132	Viruses called hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV) are spread by contact with blood and other bodily fluids. HBV and HCV can cause chronic hepatitis, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), liver failure, and liver cancer. If you have chronic HBV, you should be screened for liver cancer. Other risk factors High alcohol use can cause damage to the liver. Having NAFLD may lead to cirrhosis in those who drink little or no alcohol. NAFLD is seen in those with high weight, diabetes, high cholesterol, or other conditions. Diabetes, high weight, or other problems with processing sugar may put someone at risk for liver cancer. Genetic hemochromatosis is an inherited condition that causes the liver to store too much iron from food. Liver cancer screening Screening helps find disease early before symptoms occur, when it is more likely to be cured with treatment. The goal of liver cancer screening is to find liver cancer early in those who are at risk for developing liver cancer. Two tests are recommended every 6 months for those at risk of developing liver cancer.
3133	Blood cell formation All blood cells start as blood stem cells. A blood stem cell has to mature or go through many stages to become a red blood cell, white blood cell, or platelet. AML affects the myeloid progenitor cells, which develop into red blood cells, granulocytes (a type of white blood cell), and platelets. Copyright 2020 National Comprehensive Cancer Network® . www.nccn.org AML starts in the blood stem cells and makes abnormal myeloblasts, also called blasts or leukemia cells. What are blasts? A blast is an immature white blood cell. Blasts are committed to becoming a type of blood cell. Myeloblasts mature into granulocytes also known as neutrophils. These are types of immune cells that help prevent and control infection. In AML, abnormal myeloblasts are found in the bone marrow or blood. These blasts crowd out other blood cells causing bone marrow or blood to not work as it should. What's in this book? This book is organized into the following chapters: Chapter 2: Testing for AML provides an overview of tests you might receive, and the role of genetic and biomarker mutation testing. Chapter 3: Types of treatment gives a general overview of AML treatment.
3134	It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Stomach cancer can also grow inwards and form an ulcer or masses that can cause symptoms. Stomach cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the stomach. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Those with stomach cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage stomach cancer has not grown beyond the first layer (mucosa) of the stomach wall. The tumor is often small (2 centimeters or less) and is not in any lymph nodes. Locoregional or locally advanced stomach cancer has invaded other layers of the stomach wall and/or spread to the lymph nodes or organs near the stomach. Metastatic stomach cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The most common metastatic sites are the liver, abdominal lining (peritoneum), and distant lymph nodes. It may also spread to the lungs or bone.
3135	Because longterm sun exposure can lead to squamous cell skin cancer, it is more common in people who have spent more years in the sun. Sun exposure Most squamous cell skin cancers are caused by spending too much time in the sun over a long period of time, frequent tanning, and getting sunburns. Indoor tanning Indoor tanning is a major risk factor for squamous cell skin cancer. Using all types of indoor tanning machines (eg, booths, beds) increases the risk of getting any type of skin cancer. Environmental toxins People who are often exposed to pollutants such as tobacco smoke, exhaust from cars or other vehicles, and arsenic (which can be found in soil, water, and air) can experience skin damage that can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Scars and chronic wounds CSCC can form in scars or chronic (nonhealing) wounds, such as ulcers (sores) and burns. This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment.
3136	If it clearly shows cancer in the bone, a bone scan and sodium fluoride PET/ CT may not be needed. FDG-PET/CT can be done at the same time as a CT used for diagnosis. Ultrasound Ultrasound (US) uses high-energy sound waves to form pictures of the inside of the body. This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that are near the skin. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a biopsy. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental -ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaws, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
3137	When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core. A core sample is only 1 to 2 Biopsy of the prostate A biopsy removes a sample of tissue that is tested for cancer. This is a transperineal biopsy, in which a needle is inserted through the perineum and into the prostate. An ultrasound probe, which goes into the rectum, helps the doctor guide the needle into the prostate. MRI scans of your prostate may be combined with the ultrasound image to provide a highly accurate picture of the cancer. millimiters wide and about 12 to 20 millimeters long—about the width of a toothpick and the length of a raisin. The urologist will typically take 12 or more core samples from different parts of the prostate. Checking different areas provides a more complete evaluation of cancer throughout the gland. After the biopsy samples are removed, they’ll be sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a specialist called a pathologist will examine the samples under a microscope and test them for cancer.
3138	Not everyone with prostate cancer will need a PSMA-PET scan. It’s mostly used to monitor prostate cancer for recurrence. It’s also used to determine whether targeted therapy can treat certain cases of metastatic prostate cancer. Bone scan A bone scan can detect whether cancer has spread to your bones. A bone scan may be used if you have bone pain, have a high risk for bone metastasis, or have changes in certain test results. Bone scans may also be used to monitor treatment. A bone scan uses a radioactive tracer to make pictures of the inside of bones. Before the pictures are taken, the tracer is injected into your bloodstream. It can take a few hours for the tracer to enter your bones. A special camera will take pictures of the tracer in your bones. Areas of bone damage absorb more tracer than healthy bone. These areas show up as bright spots in the scans. Ultrasound Ultrasound imaging is commonly used to help guide a biopsy of the prostate. This is called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) imaging. During a biopsy, an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. The probe is about the size of a finger.
3139	You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies. You may need to rest and place an ice pack on the biopsy area after the procedure. If you are working or have other commitments, you may want to take the day off to recover emotionally and physically from the experience. Axillary lymph node needle biopsy An axillary lymph node (ALN) drains lymph fluid from the breast and nearby areas. In an axillary lymph node biopsy, a sample of lymph node near the armpit (axilla) is biopsied with a needle. This is to determine if abnormal lymph nodes seen on imaging tests contain cancer cells. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) or core biopsy will be used. If cancer is found, it is called node positive (node+). A marker may be placed in the node so that it can be identified later if needed. Standard of care is the best known way to treat particular disease based on past clinical trials. There may be more than one treatment regimen that is considered standard of care.
3140	Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine. A core needle biopsy (CNB) removes more than one tissue sample, but usually through the same area on the breast. The samples are small. Biopsy In a biopsy, a sample of tumor is removed. There are different types of biopsy. This image shows an ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. The needle is often guided into the tumor with imaging. When mammography is used during a biopsy, it is called a stereotactic needle biopsy. One or more clips may be placed near the breast tumor during a biopsy. The clips are small, painless, and made of metal. They will mark the site for future treatment and imaging. The clips will stay in place until surgery. If the area biopsied is benign, the clip will remain in place to mark the biopsy site on future imaging. The clips cause no problems, even if they are left in place for a long time. You will be able to go through airport security and have an MRI. There are both physical and emotional experiences in having biopsies.
3141	A chromosome translocation is the switching of part of one chromosome with another chromosome within the lymphoma cells. Uncommon FL When FL has uncommon pathologic (disease) features or is t(14;18)-negative, it might be called uncommon FL (uFL). It is treated as classic FL in this book. Pediatric-type FL Pediatric-type FL (PTFL) usually occurs in children but can also occur in adults. Usually, only one lymph node is enlarged in the head and neck region and there might be no symptoms. Transformed FL FL can transform into a more aggressive lymphoma called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). This means your slowgrowing FL has turned into a large-cell, fastgrowing lymphoma. Transformed FL can occur before, during, or after treatment. In DLBCL, tumors are commonly found in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, or other tissues and organs. Key points The lymphatic or lymph system is a network of tissues and organs that helps your body fight infections and disease. It is part of the immune system. h Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that develops from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Lymphocytes normally grow in response to infection or inflammation.
3142	If you do not have the Ph chromosome or the BCR::ABL1 gene, you do not have CML. BCR::ABL1 is not found in normal blood cells. It is not passed down from birth parents to children. The BCR::ABL1 gene makes a new protein that leads to uncontrolled blood cell growth. This growth ultimately leads to CML. Treatment for CML aims to stop the activity of the BCR::ABL1 protein. Those with CML should be treated at centers experienced in this type of cancer. What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care. In fact, you’re more likely to get the care you want by asking questions and making shared decisions with your care team. Consider seeking the opinion of a CML specialist. The NCCN Guidelines for Patients will help you understand cancer care. With better understanding, you’ll be more prepared to discuss your care with your team and share your concerns. Many people feel more satisfied when they play an active role in their care. You may not know what to ask your care team. That’s common.
3143	What causes pancreatic cancer? What are the stages of pancreatic cancer? What is the best treatment for pancreatic cancer? Key points Pancreatic cancer is one of the most common cancers. It is a challenging cancer to treat, but treatment is improving. Experts are studying the best ways to treat pancreatic cancer and are developing new treatments. Read this chapter to learn the answers to some common questions about pancreatic cancer. What is pancreatic cancer? Pancreatic cancer starts in a large gland called the pancreas. The pancreas is part of the digestive system. It makes enzymes that break down proteins, fats, sugars, and starches in food. It also makes hormones called insulin and glucagon that control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer affects cell growth. Pancreatic cancer cells make many new cancer cells and do not die when they should. The overgrowth of pancreatic cancer cells becomes a mass called a tumor. Pancreatic cancer cells also don’t stay in place and may grow into nearby body tissue. They may break away from a tumor, spread to other areas, and form more tumors. There are 2 main types of pancreatic cancer The more common type of pancreatic cancer forms from exocrine cells.
3144	Feel for enlarged lymph nodes in your neck, underarm, and groin. Tell your doctor if you have felt any lumps or have any pain. NCCN Guidelines for Patients® Adrenal Tumors, 2022 What is your family health history? Some cancers and other diseases run in families—those who are related to you through genes passed down from parent to child. This information is called a family health history. You can ask family members about their health issues like heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, and at what age they were diagnosed. For relatives who have died, ask about the cause and age of death. Start by asking your parents, siblings, and children. Next, talk to half-siblings, aunts and uncles, niece and nephews, grandparents, and grandchildren. Write down what you learn about your family history and share this information with your health care provider. Some of the questions to ask include: Do you have any chronic diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, or health conditions such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol? Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed?
3145	In fact, most patients who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer have no symptoms. Symptoms are more common for those with advanced prostate cancer. Symptoms, if they occur, can include: Blood in the urine or semen Burning or pain while urinating Unexplained weight loss Bone, hip, or back pain It’s important to know that prostate cancer has many of the same symptoms as a condition called enlarged prostate (also called benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH). An enlarged prostate can push against the bladder and compress the urethra, which slows the flow of urine and can cause a feeling that you haven’t fully emptied your bladder. Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in American males, after skin cancer. However, prostate cancer has one of the highest survival rates of any cancer when found early. BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone.
3146	Experts don’t know exactly what causes pancreatic cells to become cancer cells. But they do know several factors that increase the chance of developing pancreatic cancer. Such risk factors include: Lifestyle factors, such as smoking tobacco, heavy alcohol use, and a less healthy diet Major contact with cancer-causing chemicals, such as pesticides Health conditions, such as diabetes and chronic inflammation of the pancreas Close blood relatives with pancreatic, breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers or melanoma About 1 in 10 pancreatic cancers are hereditary. This means that a higher risk was passed down to you by your parents through your genes. The genetic cause of hereditary pancreatic cancer is unknown in most families. Hereditary health conditions that are known to increase risk of pancreatic cancer include: Hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Lynch syndrome, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome Familial malignant melanoma syndrome, also known as melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome or familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM) syndrome Hereditary pancreatitis Genetic tests detect the genes that have been linked to these hereditary conditions and are discussed in Chapter What are the stages of pancreatic cancer?
3147	Fertility-sparing surgery may be an option. This involves removing one or both ovaries and fallopian tubes but leaving the uterus in place. Surgery to remove one ovary and its fallopian tube is called a unilateral salpingooophorectomy (USO). USO is only an option if the cancer is in 1 ovary and the cancer is appropriate for this procedure. After a USO, you may still be able to become pregnant naturally if you haven’t entered menopause. If the cancer is in both ovaries, a BSO (without hysterectomy) may be an option. While you can't become pregnant naturally after a BSO, pregnancy may be possible using assisted reproductive approaches. One such approach is in vitro fertilization (IVF). In IVF, eggs are fertilized with sperm in a lab to create embryos. The embryos are implanted into the uterus or frozen for future use. The eggs used for IVF may be yours (removed from your ovary before surgery) or donor eggs. Donor eggs are removed from women who have volunteered to go through hormone treatment to stimulate egg production in the ovaries. Surgical methods A laparotomy is the most common method for ovarian cancer surgery. A laparotomy is a long surgical cut in the abdomen.
3148	In people with CLL, abnormal B cells grow out of control, crowding out healthy B cells. This oversupply of abnormal B cells prevents healthy B cells from performing their duties effectively. This results in fewer healthy blood cells and a higher risk of infection. What are the symptoms of CLL? Usually, CLL doesn’t cause symptoms at first. It may be found due to routine blood testing. Symptoms of CLL may include the following. See a health care professional as soon as you can if you have any of these symptoms: Swollen glands in your neck, or you feel swelling in your stomach Feel tired more easily or fatigue Excessive sweating or night sweats Fever Infections that keep coming back despite treatment Loss of appetite or becoming full too quickly (early satiety) Unintentional weight loss What causes CLL? The specific cause of CLL isn't currently known other than that there is a change within the bone marrow.
3149	Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor is preferred for dMMR/MSI-H cancers. Immunotherapy increases the activity of your immune system, improving your body’s ability to find and destroy cancer cells. Checkpoint inhibitors recommended for use before colectomy in dMMR/MSI-H cancers include: Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) Nivolumab (Opdivo) with or without ipilimumab (Yervoy) Sometimes radiation therapy (alone or with chemotherapy) is given along with systemic therapy for unresectable cancers. For more information on the side effects of checkpoint inhibitors, see the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Immunotherapy Side Effects: Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Chemotherapy after surgery Chemotherapy is the use of medicine to kill cancer cells. It is a type of systemic therapy. Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously. This means the medicine is slowly infused into the bloodstream through a vein. It travels through the bloodstream to reach cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Cycles vary in length depending on which drugs are used. Stage 1 Chemotherapy is not recommended after colectomy for stage 1 cancers.
3150	The higher the number, the larger the tumor or the more the cancer has spread. These scores will be combined to assign the cancer a stage. A TNM example might look like this: T1N0M0 or T1, N0, M T (tumor) – Size and extent of the main (primary) tumor N (node) – If cancer has spread to nearby (regional) lymph nodes M (metastasis) – If cancer has spread to distant parts of the body or metastasized Numbered stages Numbered stages are based on TNM scores. Stages range from stage 0 to stage 4, with 4 being the most advanced. They might be written as stage 0, stage I, stage II, stage III, and stage IV. Other terms might be used instead of numbered cancer stages. Resectable – Tumor can be removed completely with surgery. Unresectable – Tumor cannot be removed completely with surgery. The tumor might involve nearby veins and arteries or other structures making it unsafe to remove. Locoregional or locally advanced – This refers to a tumor that has spread to tissue, organs, or lymph nodes in the head and neck.
3151	This is similar to the sonogram used for pregnancy. A wand-like probe (transducer) will be held and moved on your neck using gel. Ultrasound is painless and does not use x-rays, so it can be repeated as needed. Ultrasound is good at showing small areas of cancer that may be in lymph nodes. Sometimes, an ultrasound or CT is used to guide a fine-needle biopsy (FNB). Keep these things in mind Take care of yourself. This is a stressful time. Seek out and ask for support. Support can be a friend, relative, neighbor, or coworker. This will be a confusing time. You will hear a lot of unfamiliar words. Interact with your health care team, ask questions, and talk about how you feel. Panoramic dental x-ray A panoramic dental x-ray or panoramic x-ray (Panorex) uses a very small dose of radiation to capture the entire mouth in one image, including the teeth, upper and lower jaw, and surrounding structures and tissues. It is commonly performed by dentists and oral surgeons in everyday practice and may be used to plan treatment for dentures, braces, extractions, and implants.
3152	Systemic therapy might be used alone or with other therapies. Goals of systemic therapy should be discussed before starting treatment. Your preferences about treatment are important. If you have any religious or personal beliefs about certain kinds of treatment, now would be the time to share them with your care team. You will likely get either a catheter or a port to deliver systemic therapy, fluids, and blood products into your body. A catheter is a thin, long tube that is often placed in the upper arm. This goes into a large vein and stays there until treatment is complete. A port is a small, round disc that is usually placed in the chest. The type and location of catheter or port will be tailored to your needs and treatment plans. Treatment options Treatment options are often described in the following ways: Preferred therapies have the most evidence they work better and may be safer than other therapies. Other recommended therapies may not work quite as well as preferred therapies, but they can still help treat cancer. Therapies used in certain cases work best for people with specific cancer features or health circumstances.
3153	Key points Squamous cell skin cancer that has spread to nearby lymph nodes is called “regional”. Your care team will test suspicious lymph nodes to determine how far the disease has spread. Testing could also include scans of your upper body, stomach, and pelvis to check for any metastatic disease (spread) to those areas. The best way to treat regional CSCC is with surgery to remove the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. Radiation therapy with or without systemic therapy is often given after surgery to kill leftover cancer cells. If surgery is not possible or not recommended, radiation therapy, systemic therapy, or a combination of both may be options. If radiation therapy is not expected to kill the cancer completely or may harm critical healthy organs, systemic therapy alone is recommended. Although it is uncommon, squamous cell skin cancer can metastasize. Metastatic CSCC that cannot be removed with surgery and/or radiation is treated with systemic therapy. Systemic therapy options for metastatic CSCC include immunotherapy or a systemic therapy given in a clinical trial. If you are not a candidate for either of these, your doctor may recommend platinum-based chemotherapy or targeted therapy.
3154	This is where new blood cells are made. Thymus After being made in bone marrow, lymphocytes travel to the thymus. The thymus is a small organ in the upper chest. Here lymphocytes develop into T lymphocytes (T cells), one of the two main types of lymphocytes. The tonsils Tonsils are small masses of lymph tissue found at the back of the throat. They help trap disease-causing germs that enter through you nose or mouth. Types of Hodgkin lymphoma There are 2 types of Hodgkin lymphoma, described next. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma Most people with Hodgkin lymphoma have classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). CHL can be recognized by large lymphocytes called ReedSternberg cells. While there are different subtypes of CHL, the same care is recommended for all of them. NLPHL While CHL is known for Reed-Sternberg cells, nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is known for popcornshaped cells. This rare form of Hodgkin lymphoma usually grows slowly, but in rare cases behaves aggressively. Over time, it can transform into one of several types of fast-growing cancer, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). What can you do to get the best care? Advocate for yourself. You have an important role to play in your care.
3155	A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well.
3156	A scope is a long, thin tube with a light and a camera that can be guided into your body. A colonoscopy is used to examine the large bowel. This involves inserting a scope into your anus and guiding it through the rectum and colon. To examine the upper GI tract, a scope is guided down the throat into the esophagus, stomach, and small bowel. This is called an upper endoscopy. Blood tests The following tests are not used alone to diagnose ovarian cancer, but abnormal results may signal health problems. General health A complete blood count (CBC) measures the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in a sample of blood. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets help to control bleeding. Your blood counts may be too low or too high because of cancer or other health problems. A blood chemistry profile measures the levels of different chemicals that are affected by your kidneys, bones, and other organs and tissues. Levels that are too high or too low may be a sign that an organ isn’t working well.
3157	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
3158	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
3159	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
3160	By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney. Blood then flows through tiny filtering tubes in the kidney called renal tubules. Blood is cleaned as it flows through the renal tubules. The renal tubules remove waste and other substances from the blood. These substances are made into urine. The clean, filtered blood flows out of the kidney through the renal vein. The renal vein merges with a larger vein called the vena cava. The vena cava takes clean blood back up to the heart. Urine flows out of the renal tubules and collects in a hollow space in the middle of the kidney called the renal pelvis. Urine leaves the renal pelvis through a long tube called the The kidneys filter blood to remove waste Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery. Renal tubules remove excess water and other waste from the blood to make urine. Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter.
3161	This procedure is further explained in Chapter Cystoscopy A cystoscopy is an exam to look inside the urethra and bladder for any signs of cancer. If anything looks suspicious, the urologist can use a small tool on the cystoscope to remove tiny tissue samples for testing (biopsy). A flexible cystoscope (upper left) is used for viewing and biopsy. A rigid cystoscope (bottom right) is more invasive, but it can also remove small tumors. In a very similar exam, called a ureteroscopy, the cystoscope goes a little farther to examine the upper parts of the urinary tract—the ureters and inner kidneys. A ureteroscopy is done only if something seems abnormal with the ureters or kidneys. After a cystoscopy After the procedure, you may have one or more of these side effects: Bleeding from your urethra, which can appear bright pink in your urine or on toilet paper A burning sensation during urination Urinating more often for the next day or two If a tissue sample was taken for a biopsy, it will be sent to a lab and tested for cancer. Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body.
3162	This procedure is further explained in Chapter Cystoscopy A cystoscopy is an exam to look inside the urethra and bladder for any signs of cancer. If anything looks suspicious, the urologist can use a small tool on the cystoscope to remove tiny tissue samples for testing (biopsy). A flexible cystoscope (upper left) is used for viewing and biopsy. A rigid cystoscope (bottom right) is more invasive, but it can also remove small tumors. In a very similar exam, called a ureteroscopy, the cystoscope goes a little farther to examine the upper parts of the urinary tract—the ureters and inner kidneys. A ureteroscopy is done only if something seems abnormal with the ureters or kidneys. After a cystoscopy After the procedure, you may have one or more of these side effects: Bleeding from your urethra, which can appear bright pink in your urine or on toilet paper A burning sensation during urination Urinating more often for the next day or two If a tissue sample was taken for a biopsy, it will be sent to a lab and tested for cancer. Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body.
3163	Urine drips out of the renal tubules into the renal pelvis, then leaves the kidney through the ureter. Clean, filtered blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. ureter. The ureter carries urine to the bladder. The bladder holds urine until it is released from the body when you urinate (or pee). A shorter tube, called the urethra, takes urine from the bladder to outside the body. Most people have two kidneys. However, each kidney works on its own and does not need the other to function. This means that the body can often work well with less than one complete kidney. Many people live full, healthy lives with only one kidney. Kidney cancer Kidney cancer starts in the tissues of the kidneys. Almost all kidney cancers are carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. In the kidneys, carcinomas most often start in the cells that line the renal tubules. This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys.
3164	Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red. Or, if there isn’t enough blood to be visible, your urine may look normal. But your clinical team can still detect blood by looking at a sample of the urine under a microscope. Blood in the urine can be caused by many other things besides bladder cancer. The most common cause is an infection in the urinary tract. So anyone with blood in their urine should see a health care provider to get their urine tested. Other symptoms of bladder cancer include: Frequent urination Urgency to urinate Painful urination Back pain Not every person with bladder cancer will have all these symptoms. Some people will have no symptoms. A person with one or more of these symptoms should visit a doctor or other health care provider who can recommend different tests. These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean?
3165	You do not need to know what all of these tests mean. It is ok to skip over information that doesn't interest you. Guide 1 Possible tests and procedures: AML Medical history and physical exam Complete blood count (CBC), differential, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), B12, and folic acid Blood clotting tests Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with AML biomarker and genetic testing Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing Brain CT without contrast, if central nervous system (CNS) bleed suspected Brain MRI with contrast, if leukemic meningitis suspected FDG-PET/CT, if leukemia outside the blood and bone marrow (extramedullary) suspected Lumbar puncture (LP) Heart tests General health tests Some general health tests are described next. Medical history A medical history is a record of all health issues and treatments you have had in your life. Be prepared to list any illness or injury and when it happened. Bring a list of old and new medicines and any over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, herbals, or supplements you take. Some supplements interact with and affect medicines that your care team may prescribe. Tell your care team about any symptoms you have.
3166	These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean? Bladder cancer When health care professionals describe cancer as aggressive, they mean the cancer is likely to grow or spread more quickly than average. Bladder cancer is often described by how far it has spread into the muscle layer of the bladder. Here, the cancer tumor has grown through the inner lining (urothelial layer) and invaded the muscle layer in the bladder wall. This type of cancer is known as muscleinvasive bladder cancer. Aggressive can also be used to describe a treatment that’s stronger or more intense than other treatment options. Some people reading this book may have already been tested and given a diagnosis of bladder cancer. For those who haven’t been diagnosed yet, the only way to make sure you have bladder cancer is to have tests that: h Look inside your bladder (cystoscopy and imaging) Study your urine (urinalysis and cytology) Analyze a sample of surgically removed bladder tissue (resection and biopsy) We’ll talk about these and other tests in Chapter What causes bladder cancer? Many people wonder why they got cancer.
3167	A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir. Sometimes the stoma can be made in the belly button, making it less noticeable. To drain urine, a catheter is inserted into the reservoir several times a day. A benefit to this type of urinary diversion is that an ostomy bag does not need to be worn on the outside of the body. If the rectum is removed If the rectum is removed, a permanent colostomy may be created. A colostomy connects the remaining colon to the outside of the abdomen. Stool exits the body through a stoma and goes into a bag attached to the skin. In some cases, the remaining colon can be connected to the remaining rectum or anus and a permanent colostomy may not be required. You may retain near-normal bowel function. If the anus is removed during the surgery, a permanent colostomy is always needed. If both the bowel and bladder are removed If both urinary and fecal diversion are needed, a double-barreled wet colostomy (DBWC) is sometimes used. In this technique, only one opening (stoma) on the surface of the abdomen is needed.
3168	This means that urine follows the same path out of the body it normally would if you still had your bladder. Because urine leaves the body in the usual way, a stoma and an ostomy bag aren’t needed. A neobladder doesn’t work exactly the same way as a real bladder. You’ll probably need to empty it more often at first, maybe every 1 to 3 hours. Also, urine might come out when you don’t want or expect it to, like during sleep. This is called urinary incontinence. With time and training, you’ll be able to better control the flow of urine from your neobladder. Even so, a neobladder may be difficult to empty completely. Some people have a catheter inserted through their urethra to help empty the neobladder. Continent cutaneous pouch (Indiana pouch) This urinary diversion uses a portion of the large intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. (It’s also called an Indiana pouch because it was developed by surgeons at Indiana University.) A section of the small intestine is used to connect the pouch to a stoma in the wall of the abdomen.
3169	This system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The kidneys make hormones that help control blood pressure. They also make hormones that tell the body to make more red blood cells. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The kidneys and urinary system The kidneys are the main organs of the urinary system. The ureters, bladder, and urethra hold and transport urine before it is released from the body. An adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. The kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by a layer of fat. Covering the fat is an outer layer of fibrous tissue called Gerota’s fascia. When kidney cancer grows into and beyond Gerota’s fascia, it is a sign of advanced kidney cancer. How the kidneys work The kidneys perform many jobs to keep your body healthy. The main job of the kidneys is to filter blood to remove waste and extra water from the body. By filtering the blood, the kidneys also control and balance the levels of fluids and chemicals in your body. The renal artery carries blood with waste into the kidney.
3170	• Together, these organs are called the urinary tract. Bladder cancer happens when abnormal (cancer) cells develop genetic errors (mutations) that cause them to make many more cancer cells. Cancer cells also avoid normal cell death. As cancer cells increase, they crowd out and overwhelm normal cells. Over time, the cancer cells may form a tumor in the bladder. Sometimes the cells grow deeper and invade the bladder’s muscle layer. The cancer may even break through the bladder and spread to other parts of the body. Is bladder cancer common? Bladder cancer is one of the most common cancers in adults. Most people who have bladder cancer are aged 55 years and over. Bladder cancer is often found at an early stage when the cancer is highly treatable. However, bladder cancer commonly comes back again even after treatment. In many cases, bladder cancer comes back in a different place and sometimes more advanced than before. That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned.
3171	All prostate cells, both normal cells and cancer cells, make PSA. If there’s something wrong with the prostate— like prostate cancer—the prostate may make more PSA. While most PSA goes into semen, a little bit ends up in the bloodstream, too. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer. Likewise, an increase in PSA after treatment may indicate that the treatment is losing effectiveness. However, age and other factors—such as an enlarged prostate or a urinary tract infection— can also cause high levels of PSA. This means that a PSA test by itself can’t provide a diagnosis of prostate cancer. That’s why a PSA test is often paired with imaging or a digital rectal exam, or both, to decide whether you need a biopsy. PSA level (also called total PSA) is measured in nanograms of PSA per milliliter (ng/mL) of blood. PSA testing Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a protein made inside the prostate gland. If there’s something wrong with the prostate, the prostate may make more PSA. An unusually high amount of PSA in the blood may be a sign of prostate cancer.
3172	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
3173	Symptoms can be a sign of recurrence. Tell your care team if you have any of these symptoms: h Pain or bloating in your pelvis or belly Unexplained weight loss Upset stomach Constipation Trouble eating or feeling full fast Fatigue Needing to urinate often or urgently The presence of specific biomarkers helps guide treatment for recurrent ovarian cancer. If testing for the following biomarkers hasn't already been done, it is recommended now: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status HER2 expression Microsatellite instability (MSI) Mismatch repair (MMR) Tumor mutational burden (TMB) BRAF V600E mutation Folate receptor alpha (FRα) RET mutations NTRK gene fusions Your doctor may choose to test for even more biomarkers than those listed. Everyone with persistent or recurrent ovarian cancer is encouraged to consider a clinical trial for treatment. Platinum-resistant cancer Ovarian cancer is called platinum-resistant if: h It doesn’t improve or worsens during platinum-based chemotherapy, or It returns less than 6 months after successful treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. Because platinum-based chemotherapy didn’t improve your cancer, a different type of recurrence treatment is recommended. Non-platinum chemotherapy is usually given first. Another preferred option is bevacizumab (Avastin). This may also be added to your chemotherapy.
3174	Leukemia can spread outside the bloodstream to lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and skin. It rarely spreads to the lining of the brain and spinal cord. Imaging tests can also show areas of infection or bleeding that may impact your care. A radiologist, a medical expert in interpreting imaging tests, will interpret the test and send a report to your doctor. While these reports might be available to you through your patient portal or patient access system, please wait to discuss these results with your care team. You will likely not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is a substance used to improve the quality of the pictures of the inside of the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. Contrast might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). Oral contrast does not get absorbed from your intestines and will be passed with your next bowel movements. IV contrast will leave the body in the urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Not all imaging tests require contrast, but many do.
3175	Scientists call these biomarkers. At this time, biomarker tests may provide some helpful clues about bladder cancer, but aren’t quite reliable enough to diagnose it. Biomarker tests are also sometimes used for surveillance in people who’ve been treated for non–muscleinvasive bladder cancer. Surveillance means watching to see if the cancer comes back after it has been treated or removed. Urine cytology Urine cytology is a lab test that analyzes your urine for any cancer or precancerous cells. You may receive a urine cytology test if you have blood in your urine. A urine cytology is done like other urine tests— you pee into a small plastic container. Or, your urologist may collect a sample of your urine during cystoscopy. Either way, the urine sample is sent to a lab for testing. At the lab, a pathologist (a doctor who examines cells and tissue to find disease) uses a microscope to look for any abnormal cells in your urine sample. If abnormal cells are found, it means that cancer may be located anywhere in the urinary tract. You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder.
3176	Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red. Or, if there isn’t enough blood to be visible, your urine may look normal. But your clinical team can still detect blood by looking at a sample of the urine under a microscope. Blood in the urine can be caused by many other things besides bladder cancer. The most common cause is an infection in the urinary tract. So anyone with blood in their urine should see a health care provider to get their urine tested. Other symptoms of bladder cancer include: Frequent urination Urgency to urinate Painful urination Back pain Not every person with bladder cancer will have all these symptoms. Some people will have no symptoms. A person with one or more of these symptoms should visit a doctor or other health care provider who can recommend different tests. These tests are used to make a diagnosis. (A diagnosis means identifying an illness by using tests.) What does aggressive mean?
3177	You’ll also be asked how these symptoms affect your quality of life. Quality of life refers to your overall satisfaction with your well-being and your ability to participate in regular activities. It’s important to answer all these questions honestly and completely so your care team has a full and up-to-date assessment of how you’re doing. Blood and urine tests For a blood test, a needle is inserted into a vein in your arm to remove a sample of blood. The sample is examined in a lab where cells, proteins, and other components in the blood are tested for signs of disease or other conditions. If you have a higher PSA level, you may have additional blood or urine testing. These tests, sometimes referred to as biomarker tests, can be used in addition to PSA to help decide whether further testing is needed. Such blood tests include 4Kscore, PHI, and IsoPSA, among others. Some of the urine tests include ExoDx, miR Sentinel, MPS, PCA3, and SelectMDx. Diagnostic tests If the PSA test, digital rectal exam, blood or urine tests, or other factors (like family history, race, or age) suggest you may have prostate cancer, you’ll be offered diagnostic testing.
3178	Like a CT scanner, an MRI is a large machine with a tunnel in the middle. Unlike CT, MRI doesn’t use radiation (x-rays). An MRI also makes much more noise and takes longer than a CT scan. Tell your team if you get nervous in small spaces. You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. You’ll need to remain as motionless as possible during each scan. You may be positioned with pillows or bolsters to help you keep still. Imaging To look for cancer that has spread beyond the bladder, you may have an imaging scan of your abdomen and pelvis. Because an MRI uses magnets, you can’t bring any metal objects (such as a cell phone, wristwatch, belt with a metal buckle, or jewelry) into the imaging room. Other types of imaging CT and MRI are commonly used to see how far bladder cancer has spread. Other types of imaging are sometimes used to look for cancer in other parts of the urinary tract or other parts of the body: Urogram uses a contrast solution and either CT or MRI to see how well your entire urinary tract is working.
3179	Your primary doctor can help you express your thoughts about treatments to your cancer care team. A urologist is an expert in the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. A urologic oncologist is a surgeon who diagnoses cancers of the urinary tract and the male reproductive organs, and treats the cancer using surgery and intravesical therapy. A medical oncologist treats cancer using systemic therapies such as chemotherapy and immunotherapy. A medical oncologist will often coordinate your care with other team members. If not, ask who will coordinate your care. A radiation oncologist prescribes and plans radiation therapy to treat cancer. Oncology nurses provide your hands-on care, like giving systemic therapy, managing your care, answering questions, and helping you cope with side effects. A pharmacist prepares chemotherapy and other medicines, and can offer treatment advice. A diagnostic radiologist reads the results of x-rays and other imaging tests. An anesthesiologist gives anesthesia, a medicine so you don’t feel pain during surgery or procedures. Advanced practice providers are an important part of any team. These are registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants who monitor your health and provide care.
3180	A biopsy is an invasive test, which means that it goes into (invades) your body. All invasive tests have some risk. The risks for a prostate biopsy include infection, bleeding, and pain. Doctors use invasive tests only when needed. You and your doctors will decide when, or if, you need a biopsy. A biopsy procedure is usually performed by a urologist. A urologist is a doctor who’s an expert in treating diseases of the urinary system and the male reproductive organs. For this procedure, you’ll lie on your side with your knees curled up or you’ll lie on your back with your legs raised. You’ll be given anesthesia to numb the pain or to put you to sleep. The urologist will insert a lubricated probe into your rectum. The probe provides a visual image of the prostate. The urologist will then insert a hollow needle into the prostate gland using the video display to guide it. The needle will be inserted either through the rectum or through the perineum (the skin between the anus and scrotum). When the urologist removes the needle, it will pull out a small sample of prostate tissue called a core.
3181	You’ll need a cystoscopy procedure to find out if it’s in the urethra or the bladder. If cancer isn’t found in the urethra or bladder, you’ll need imaging tests to investigate the ureters, kidneys, or other areas. Urine tests for tumor markers Tumors shed cancer cells somewhat like a dog sheds hair. These cancer cells can end up in your urine. Urine tests are now available Cystoscopy and biopsy Cystoscopy is a procedure to look inside your urethra and bladder for any sign of cancer. This procedure uses a cystoscope, a tube with a camera and a light at the end, which is inserted into the urethra and through to the bladder. Cystoscopy may be done at your urologist’s office, a hospital, or a clinic. The procedure takes only a few minutes, doesn’t require general anesthesia, and you can go home afterward. During a cystoscopy You’ll lie on your back on an exam table. You may be positioned with your feet up and your knees apart. After lubricating your urethra (and possibly numbing it with an anesthetic gel), your urologist will slowly insert the cystoscope into the opening of the urethra.
3182	Stage 4B is metastatic bladder cancer. Grade Subtypes The next piece of information used to plan treatment is the cancer grade. The grade measures how aggressive the cancer is. It’s a rating of how fast the cancer will likely grow and spread. To figure out the grade, a sample of your tumor will be studied in a laboratory by a pathologist. The pathologist will compare the cancer cells to normal cells. The more different they look, the higher the grade. And the higher the grade, the faster the cancer is expected to spread. LG means that the cancer cells are low grade (slow growing). HG means that the cancer cells are high grade (fast growing). The inner lining of the bladder is made of urothelial cells. Most cases of bladder cancer start in the urothelial cells. So this type of cancer is called urothelial cancer. But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes.
3183	This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys. Because it is the most common type, RCC is often simply referred to as kidney cancer. RCC is the focus of this book. There are other, less common cancers that can arise in the kidney. While they can sometimes be confused with RCC, it is important to note that they are treated differently. Urothelial carcinoma starts in the cells that line the renal pelvis and ureter that drain the kidney. While these tumors can be found up the ureter near the kidneys, they are not kidney tumors. These tumors share many features with bladder cancer. These tumors used to be called transitional call cancer. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Bladder Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) usually occurs in young children. In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney.
3184	But in rare cases, urothelial cell cancer has features that look like other types of cells. These are referred to as subtypes. Some of them include: Glandular subtype Squamous cell subtype Micropapillary subtype Plasmacytoid subtype Sarcomatoid subtype Nested subtype Lymphoepithelioma-like subtype Microcystic and tubular subtype It’s important to investigate whether you have one of these or another subtype. In general, treatment for these uncommon subtypes is similar in the early stages to treatment for typical urothelial cancer. However, some subtypes might grow or advance faster than typical urothelial cell cancer. And faster growth might mean it needs more aggressive treatment. Key points An important thing about bladder cancer is whether it has or it hasn’t grown into the muscle layer. Cancer that has invaded the muscle needs more aggressive treatment. The stage of cancer describes how deep it has grown into the bladder wall and how far it has spread. Cancer stage is used to determine which tests and treatments will help you receive the best outcome. Bladder cancer at stage 0 and stage 1 haven’t invaded the muscle layer. Stage 0 means that abnormal cells have grown on the inside lining of the bladder.
3185	That’s why follow-up testing is so important. People with bladder cancer need regular follow-up tests for many years to check if the cancer has returned. The most common kind of bladder cancer starts in the urothelial cells, which are stretchy cells that line the inside of the bladder. Urothelial cells also form the inner layer in the rest of the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys, the ureters, and the urethra. Cancer of the urothelium can start in these areas instead of the bladder, although it’s less common. Other (non-urothelial) types of bladder cancer are much less common. These include squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. How is bladder cancer found? Bladder cancer is usually found when a person has symptoms. A symptom is a problem or feeling that may signal a disease or condition. The most common symptom of bladder cancer, and the one that usually appears first, is having blood in your urine (hematuria). How does blood get into urine? Bladder tumors are likely to release a little blood, which mixes with the urine in your bladder. The blood may turn your urine pink or bright red.
3186	About bladder cancer What is bladder cancer? Bladder cancer is a disease that occurs when cells in the inner lining of the bladder grow out of control. The bladder is a hollow, balloonlike organ that stores urine. It’s located in your pelvis—the area between your hip bones in your lower abdomen. The bladder’s inner lining, called the urothelium, prevents urine from leaking back into the body. What does the bladder do? • The bladder is a hollow organ in the lower pelvis. Its main job is to store urine (pee). In adults, the bladder can hold up to 2 cups of urine. • Urine is made by the kidneys and flows down to the bladder through two tubes called ureters. • The bladder gets bigger as it fills with urine and gets smaller when you pee. It’s about the size of an orange when empty and the size of a grapefruit when full. When you urinate, the muscles in the walls of the bladder contract. This forces the urine out of the bladder and through a tube called the urethra, which streams it out of the body. • Together, these organs are called the urinary tract.
3187	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
3188	Sometimes, a biopsy of the uterine lining (an endometrial biopsy) may be part of the initial evaluation during the pelvic exam. This test can rule out a uterine cancer. An exam of the rectum and vagina together may also be done to check for cancer in the space between the rectum and vagina. This is called a rectovaginal exam. Imaging tests Imaging tests can show the location, size, and shape of an ovarian tumor. They can also show if the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries. Your care team will tell you how to prepare for your imaging tests. Ultrasound Ultrasound is often the first imaging test used to look for ovarian cancer. It uses sound waves to make pictures of areas inside of the body. Ultrasound is good at showing the size, shape, and location of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, and nearby tissues. It can also show if there is a mass in the ovary and whether the mass is solid or filled with fluid. The 2 types of ultrasounds that may be used to look for ovarian cancer are described next. Both are done using a hand-held device called an ultrasound probe.
3189	The inner os is the upper part of the endocervix that serves as an opening between the uterus and the cervix. The area where the endocervix and ectocervix meet is called the squamo-columnar junction or the transformation zone. Most cervical cancers and pre-cancers start in the ectocervix portion of the transformation zone. The cervical stroma is the thick layer of muscular tissue beneath the cervical lining. The parametrium is the fat and connective tissue that surrounds the uterus (and cervix) and connects it to the pelvis. Although the cervix is part of the uterus, uterine cancer is diagnosed and treated differently than cervical cancer. This patient guide does not discuss treatment of uterine cancers, such as endometrial cancer and uterine sarcomas. Cervical changes Cervical cancer starts as areas of abnormal, microscopic cells on the surface of the cervix. These changes are known as cervical dysplasia or cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Mutations (changes) in the DNA of these cells cause them to become abnormal. If left untreated, cervical dysplasia may become cervical cancer. CIN is graded based on the depth of the abnormal cells on the lining of the cervix.
3190	Each ovary is about the size and shape of a grape. One is on the left side of the uterus and the other is on the right. Each is surrounded by a long, thin tube called a fallopian tube. After an egg is pushed out by the ovary, it is caught by the fallopian tube and travels into the uterus. Here the fetus grows and develops during pregnancy. If the egg is not fertilized, this leads to a period. The uterus and at least 1 ovary and fallopian tube are needed for menstruation and pregnancy. The female reproductive system The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina. Types of ovarian cancer Most ovarian cancers are found in the outer surface of the ovaries, called the epithelium. There are more than 5 types of epithelial ovarian cancer. The most common forms are: High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) High-grade endometrioid carcinoma Less common ovarian cancers Rare types of ovarian cancer are called less common ovarian cancers (LCOCs) or less common ovarian histologies (LCOHs). They can start in the epithelium, in tissues that support the ovaries, or in the reproductive (egg) cells of the ovary.
3191	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
3192	UV radiation can harm the DNA inside basal skin cells. DNA controls how cells grow and function. If the DNA inside cells becomes damaged, the cells can become abnormal and grow out of control. You’re more likely to have basal cell skin cancer if you have certain risk factors. A risk factor increases the chance of developing cancer. Risk factors for basal cell skin cancer include: UV light exposure – UV light (radiation) that comes from the sun or tanning beds increases your risk. Fair skin, red or blond hair, or light eye color – People with lighter-colored skin are at a higher risk of developing skin cancer because melanin (skin pigment) filters out the sun's harmful UV rays. Age – Risk increases with age because sun exposure builds up over time. But skin cancer is becoming more common in younger people. History of skin cancer – If you or someone in your family has had skin cancer, you’re more likely to develop any type of skin cancer. Radiation therapy – Radiation treatment for other conditions, especially at a young age, can cause skin cancer.
3193	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
3194	A pathologist will examine the biopsy for cancer and write a report called a pathology report. Ask questions about your biopsy results and what it means for your treatment. There are different types of biopsies. Some biopsies are guided using imaging, such as mammogram, ultrasound, or MRI. The primary or main tumor is biopsied first. Other tumors or tumors in different areas may also be biopsied. You may have tissue removed from the breast, lymph nodes, or both. Types of possible biopsies include: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core biopsy (CB) uses needles of different sizes to remove a sample of tissue or fluid. In a vacuum-assisted core biopsy (VACB), suction is used to remove the sample with a special vacuum device. Incisional biopsy removes a small amount of tissue through a cut in the skin or body. Excisional biopsy removes the entire abnormal area. This is not the preferred type of biopsy but may be necessary if other methods are not possible or when the biopsy results don’t match the expected findings. Skin biopsy takes a small sample of inflamed skin on the breast. Before biopsies are performed, usually the area is injected with numbing medicine.
3195	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
3196	This is known as surgical menopause. It is caused by the sudden drop in estrogen in the body. This drop can cause symptoms of menopause, including: Hot flashes Sleeping problems Night sweats Weight gain Changes in mood Thinning, drying, and irritation of the vaginal lining (vaginal atrophy) When caused by surgery, the symptoms of menopause may be sudden and more severe. There are also long-term risks of not having enough estrogen. They include heart or blood vessel problems (cardiovascular disease) and bone loss (osteoporosis). If you have symptoms of surgical menopause, your doctor may suggest non-hormonal medicine or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Discussion with a menopausal symptom team is recommended to determine whether HRT is right for you. Other risks and side effects With any type of surgery, there are health risks and side effects. Common side effects include pain, swelling, and scars. Common side effects of ovarian cancer surgery include leg swelling, trouble urinating, and constipation. Cancer and recent abdominal surgery are risk factors for developing blood clots, also known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Many patients are placed on blood thinners (either oral medications or injections) for up to 4 weeks after surgery to help prevent blood clots.
3197	This is called chemoradiation. If cancer is found in any pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes, or in any tissues outside the cervix, treatment with chemoradiation is recommended. Vaginal brachytherapy may be given in addition to EBRT and platinum chemotherapy. Locally advanced cancer This section describes treatment options for cervical cancer that has grown beyond the cervix but has not spread to the liver, lungs, or bones. Cancers that are close to spreading beyond the cervix (stage 1B3) are also considered locally advanced. Locally advanced cancers are not metastatic. The information in this section applies to the following stages: Stage 1B3 and 2A2 Stage 2B Stage 3 Stage 4A Locally advanced cancers are more likely to have spread to lymph nodes than early-stage cancers. Knowing whether lymph nodes in the pelvis or abdomen contain cancer can help guide treatment with EBRT for these cancers. You may have extra imaging to look for lymph nodes with cancer. Another approach is to surgically remove and test lymph nodes before any treatment is given. A minimally invasive method is typically used to access and remove the lymph nodes. This is called surgical staging.
3198	Some people with no known risk factors develop anal cancer. And, some people with risk factors never get anal cancer. Risk factors for anal cancer are described next. Human papillomavirus infection The risk factor most strongly linked with anal cancer is long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is a sexually transmitted virus. HPV is extremely common. It affects almost everyone who has ever been sexually active. Most people are unaware that they are–or ever were–infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In some people, however, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Doctors are still learning why one person gets anal cancer and another does not. Cancers caused by HPV include anal, cervical, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (called strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to anal cancer and other related cancers. High-risk forms of HPV include HPV16 and HPV-HPV infection can also cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus or genitals.
3199	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
3200	Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist. Sexual health Sexual side effects can occur after anal cancer treatment, including: Difficulty getting an erection Reduced sex drive (libido) Vaginal dryness Pain during sex Narrowing and shortening of the vagina Vaginal dilator therapy Radiation therapy to the pelvic area can cause the vagina to become shorter and narrower. This is called vaginal stenosis. Vaginal stenosis can make it uncomfortable or even painful to have sex, or to have vaginal examinations by a doctor. Vaginal dilator therapy can help during and after radiation therapy. A vaginal dilator is a device used to gradually stretch or widen the vagina. Vaginal dilators are not one-size-fits-all. Different sizes are available, as are dilator kits containing different size devices. The size of the dilator can be increased over time as the vagina lengthens and widens. Sexual health therapists While it may be uncomfortable to talk about sexual health, keep in mind that these side effects are common and can often be managed or lessened. Consider seeing a sexual health therapist.
3201	Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist. Sexual health Sexual side effects can occur after anal cancer treatment, including: Difficulty getting an erection Reduced sex drive (libido) Vaginal dryness Pain during sex Narrowing and shortening of the vagina Vaginal dilator therapy Radiation therapy to the pelvic area can cause the vagina to become shorter and narrower. This is called vaginal stenosis. Vaginal stenosis can make it uncomfortable or even painful to have sex, or to have vaginal examinations by a doctor. Vaginal dilator therapy can help during and after radiation therapy. A vaginal dilator is a device used to gradually stretch or widen the vagina. Vaginal dilators are not one-size-fits-all. Different sizes are available, as are dilator kits containing different size devices. The size of the dilator can be increased over time as the vagina lengthens and widens. Sexual health therapists While it may be uncomfortable to talk about sexual health, keep in mind that these side effects are common and can often be managed or lessened. Consider seeing a sexual health therapist.
3202	Shrinking the tumor with EBRT first allows for better placement of the brachytherapy applicators. Treatment with both types of radiation therapy can be completed within 7 to 8 weeks. Side effects The side effects of brachytherapy are similar to those of EBRT and include: h Skin irritation near treatment area Tiredness (fatigue) Soreness in your pelvic area Difficulty urinating or painful urination Softer bowel movements or diarrhea Increased vaginal discharge Systemic therapy Systemic therapy is treatment with substances that travel in the bloodstream, reaching cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy are types of systemic therapy. Most systemic therapies are given intravenously. This means they are slowly infused into your bloodstream through a vein. Infusions are often given in cycles of treatment days followed by days of rest. This allows your body to recover between cycles. Chemotherapy Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most commonly used systemic therapy for cervical cancer. It stops the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Cisplatin is generally preferred for platinumbased chemotherapy.
3203	Supportive care is always an option, whether you are in active treatment or not. Pelvic exenteration Pelvic exenteration is a radical surgery that involves removing multiple organs from the pelvis. The goal is to cure the cancer by removing all of the organs to which cancer has or may spread. All remaining organs of the female reproductive system are removed during pelvic exenteration. This includes the uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and vagina. Nearby organs in the pelvis including the bladder, rectum, and/or anus may also be removed. If the bladder and/or organs involved in bowel function are removed, a diversion is typically performed. Diversions are surgical procedures that divert (redirect) urine and/or stool to new openings through which they exit the body. Vaginal reconstruction It is often possible to reconstruct the vagina after pelvic exenteration. A surgeon can create an artificial vagina using muscle from another area of your body. A muscle in the lower abdomen called the rectus abdominus is often used for vaginal reconstruction. This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion.
3204	Pelvic floor therapy can include at-home exercises to tighten and release the vaginal and anal muscles (Kegel exercises) as well as hands-on techniques by a physical therapist. Sexual health Sexual side effects can occur after anal cancer treatment, including: Difficulty getting an erection Reduced sex drive (libido) Vaginal dryness Pain during sex Narrowing and shortening of the vagina Vaginal dilator therapy Radiation therapy to the pelvic area can cause the vagina to become shorter and narrower. This is called vaginal stenosis. Vaginal stenosis can make it uncomfortable or even painful to have sex, or to have vaginal examinations by a doctor. Vaginal dilator therapy can help during and after radiation therapy. A vaginal dilator is a device used to gradually stretch or widen the vagina. Vaginal dilators are not one-size-fits-all. Different sizes are available, as are dilator kits containing different size devices. The size of the dilator can be increased over time as the vagina lengthens and widens. Sexual health therapists While it may be uncomfortable to talk about sexual health, keep in mind that these side effects are common and can often be managed or lessened. Consider seeing a sexual health therapist.
3205	It is likely that the report will be sent directly to you through your patient portal or patient access system. You should discuss these results with your HCP. You will not have all of the following tests. Contrast material Contrast material is used to improve the pictures of the inside of the body. Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. It is used to make the pictures clearer. The contrast is not permanent and will leave your body in your urine immediately after the test. The types of contrast vary and are different for CT and MRI. Tell your care team if you have had allergic reactions to contrast in the past. This is important. You might be given medicines to avoid the effects of those allergies. Contrast might not be used if you have a serious allergy or if your kidneys aren’t working well. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers.
3206	Another TURBT procedure may be needed about 2 to 6 weeks after the first one. The second TURBT is done to make sure all the tumor is removed. Or it may be done to get a deeper biopsy sample for the pathologist to examine. A treatment called intravesical therapy is often done in combination with TURBT. (More about intravesical therapy to follow.) Bladder removal A procedure called a cystectomy treats bladder cancer by removing the entire bladder. When the word radical is used, it means taking out the bladder as well as nearby lymph nodes. If the disease has spread farther, sometimes other nearby organs also need to be removed, including: Urethra Prostate Seminal vesicles (glands that help make semen) TURBT A transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) is a procedure that examines and removes tumors on the bladder wall. Part of the vas deferens (a tube that carries sperm away from the testicles) Proximal urethra (part of the urethra that goes through the prostate) Uterus Ovaries Fallopian tubes Part of the vagina Radical cystectomy is the most widely used surgery for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. It’s a major operation that involves cutting into your abdomen.
3207	However, eating food that’s high in fat, such as meat and dairy products, has been linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Eating more fruits and vegetables may reduce this risk. Exercise and losing weight may also decrease the aggressiveness of prostate cancer and the likelihood of dying from it. On the other hand, smoking and obesity increase the risks of developing and dying from prostate cancer. What is early-stage prostate cancer? Prostate cancer can be grouped into earlystage cancer or advanced-stage cancer. Early stage Early-stage prostate cancer has not spread beyond the prostate. The cancer usually grows slowly and stays in the prostate. Cancer that is contained entirely within the prostate is called localized prostate cancer. This book is all about early-stage (localized) prostate cancer. Advanced stage Advanced stage means that cancer cells have spread outside the prostate to other areas in the body. This spreading is called metastasis or metastatic cancer. Metastatic prostate cancer has spread to the lymph nodes, bones, liver, lungs, and other organs. Advanced-stage prostate cancer can be separated into two types: Cancer that grows from the prostate gland to nearby lymph nodes, but no farther, is called regional prostate cancer.
3208	Using a contrast dye for both the CT scan and the MRI is preferred unless it is contraindicated, which means you have an allergy or condition that could result in a harmful reaction. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan uses a radioactive drug called a tracer. A tracer is injected into a vein (through an IV using a needle). The needle is most often inserted on the inside of your elbow. The tracer travels through your blood and collects in organs and tissues. This helps the radiologist see certain areas more clearly. You may need to wait for the tracer to be absorbed by your body, which takes about 1 hour. The tracer is attached to a substance that your cells and tissues use. Cancer cells use the substance differently than non-cancer cells.
3209	Those with Barrett esophagus are at risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. How cancer spreads Esophageal cancer usually starts in the innermost layer (mucosa) and grows outward through and along the layers of the esophagus wall. Cancer can spread to nearby lymph nodes, veins, arteries, and organs such as the liver, pancreas, lung, and spleen. It might also grow into nearby lymphatic or blood vessels, and from there spread to nearby lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. Through your cancer care, you might find measurements using the metric system (centimeters, millimeters, etc.). That is because your care team uses the metric system to measure many aspects of treatment. Esophageal cancers tend to develop slowly over many years. Before cancer develops, precancerous changes often occur in the inner lining (mucosa) of the esophagus. Since these early changes rarely cause symptoms, they often go undetected. Stages of esophageal cancer can be grouped into 3 main categories, depending on how far the cancer has spread. Early-stage cancer has not grown beyond the inside of the esophagus.
3210	Clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC are subtypes. h Almost any type of RCC can become sarcomatoid (sRCC) or have sarcomatoid features. Tumors can grow in any part of the kidney and can grow into the renal vein and vena cava. Treatment for RCC is based on histology, tumor(s) size and location, and if cancer has metastasized to other areas in the body. 2 Diagnosing kidney cancer Test results General health tests Blood tests Urine tests Imaging tests Biopsy Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Performance status Key points Most kidney cancers are found by chance during imaging tests for other health problems. Further testing is used to confirm (diagnose) kidney cancer. This chapter presents an overview of possible tests you might receive and what to expect. Test results Results from imaging studies and possible biopsy will be used to determine your treatment plan. Treatment will be based on these findings. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Don’t hesitate to ask questions and take notes during appointments. Write down questions and ask a friend or family member to take notes. Caregivers should ask questions, too.
3211	For example, it may spread from the brain to the eyes. But it rarely spreads to other areas of the body. However, a different kind of lymphoma—called secondary CNS lymphoma—starts in another part of the body but then spreads to the brain or spinal cord. This book is only about primary CNS lymphoma. What is the CNS? The central nervous system (CNS) receives signals from your senses, processes information, and controls your body’s responses. The CNS includes: The brain, which controls functions of the body such as feeling, moving, thinking, and learning. The eyes are connected directly to the brain and are also part of the CNS. h The spinal cord, which transmits messages between the brain and the body. Because the CNS is so important, your body has parts that protect it. These include: Meninges, which are membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid, which is a liquid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord. h Bones including the skull that shields your brain and the vertebrae that surround your spinal cord. What causes primary CNS lymphoma? Every person diagnosed with cancer wants to know how they got it.
3212	Pathologic features include size, shape, and type of cell. The spine The spinal or vertebral column includes a flexible column of bones called vertebrae. The spine includes the sacrum and tailbone (coccyx). There are 24 bones in the flexible spine: 7 cervical (neck), 12 thoracic (upper back), and 5 lumbar (lower back). T Tumor The primary (main) tumor size is measured in centimeters (cm). A large pea is 1 cm. A golf ball is 4 cm. A baseball is 7 cm. A grapefruit is . Tumors in limbs, torso, skull, and face Tumors are staged based on location. The appendicular skeleton is composed of 126 bones of the upper limbs, the lower limbs, the shoulder girdle, and the pelvic girdle. The shoulder girdle is a set of bones that connects the arm to the body. The pelvic girdle is a set of bones that connects the leg to the body. Staging for tumors found in the appendicular skeleton, torso, skull, and face are described next.
3213	Local disease is usually treated with surgery. The goal of treatment is to remove all of the cancer with as little damage to the surrounding skin as possible. Risk assessment After squamous cell skin cancer is confirmed, your doctor will consider several features of the cancer to determine if it is a low-, high-, or very high-risk skin cancer. This is important to know because high- or very high-risk disease is treated differently than low-risk disease. A high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence. A very high-risk CSCC has an increased risk of local recurrence and of metastasis (spread). The risk level or category for skin cancer is usually based on the highest risk factor found. The following factors are used to determine your risk level. Location and size Squamous cell skin cancer on the head or neck is more likely to return after treatment than tumors on the trunk, arms, or legs.
3214	PSA level A simple blood test will tell you how much prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is in your bloodstream. A high PSA level may indicate a risk for prostate cancer. However, high PSA levels can vary by age, race, and other factors: Age – PSA level tends to increase with age. For people in their 40s, a PSA level above 5 ng/mL is very suspicious for disease. For those in their 60s, 5 ng/mL or higher is suspicious. A PSA level of 10 ng/mL or higher is a danger sign at any age. Race – Normal PSA levels tend to be higher in Black males than in white males—about 1 point higher on average among males of the same age. Researchers don’t know the reason for this difference, but they’re investigating it. Enlarged prostate – The larger the prostate, the more PSA it can make. Other health issues besides cancer can also cause an enlarged prostate. h Sex and exercise – PSA may increase after ejaculation or vigorous exercise. Your doctor may recommend avoiding sex and exercise for 2 or 3 days before a PSA test. This short break allows PSA to return to its usual level.
3215	Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is treatment with drugs to kill cancer cells. Most chemotherapy drugs are liquids that are slowly injected into a vein (infusion). The drugs travel in your bloodstream to treat cancer throughout your body. Chemotherapy may also harm some healthy cells, which is why it can cause harsh side effects. Talk to your care team about any potential side effects from your chemotherapy treatment. Chemotherapy may be given before surgery or sometimes after surgery depending on your type or stage of bladder cancer. Chemotherapy alone (without surgery) is sometimes the main treatment for people who have metastatic bladder cancer. What is dose-dense chemotherapy? The term dose-dense refers to a method of speeding up chemotherapy by shortening the amount of time in between treatments (doses). The most common systemic chemotherapy used to treat bladder cancer is a combination of medicines known as dose-dense methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (or ddMVAC). A commonly used chemotherapy for bladder cancer is cisplatin, which contains the metal platinum. Platinum-based chemotherapy medicines can be effective against bladder cancer but can also damage the kidneys.
3216	It works by blocking the body’s use of folate, a form of vitamin B. Lymphoma cells can’t multiply and spread as quickly without folate. High doses of methotrexate are needed to overcome the blood-brain barrier and still have enough strength to kill lymphoma cells. The blood-brain barrier is a protective layer around the brain that prevents germs, infections, and other toxins from getting in. But it also blocks some chemotherapy drugs like methotrexate from reaching the brain. For induction therapy, high-dose methotrexate is given together with the immunotherapy drug rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab can be given on its own but it usually works better when given with chemotherapy. In addition to methotrexate and rituximab, one or more other chemotherapy medicines such as temozolomide, vincristine, and procarbazine may also be included. Alternatives to methotrexate High-dose methotrexate (with or without additional medicines) is the preferred induction therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. But it’s not the best option for everyone.
3217	Some people will do better than expected. Others will do worse. Many factors play a role in how the cancer will respond to treatment. Guide 2 Systemic therapy examples Chemotherapy examples • Capecitabine (Xeloda) • Carboplatin • Cisplatin (Platinol) • Cyclophosphamide • Docetaxel (Taxotere) • Doxorubicin (Adriamycin • Doxorubicin liposomal injection (Doxil) • Epirubicin (Ellence) • Eribulin (Halaven) • Fluorouracil • Methotrexate • Paclitaxel (Taxol, Abraxane) • Vinorelbine (Navelbine) Inhibitor (CDK4/6, mTOR, and PARP) examples • Abemaciclib (Verzenio) • Alpelisib (Piqray) • Everolimus (Afinitor) • Olaparib (Lynparza) • Palbociclib (Ibrance) • Ribociclib (Kisqali) • Talazoparib (Talzenna) Immunotherapy example • Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) HER2-targeted therapy (antibody, inhibitor, and conjugate) examples • Pertuzumab (Perjeta) • Trastuzumab (Herceptin) or trastuzumab substitutes (biosimilars) such as Kanjinti, Ogivri, Herzuma, Ontruzant, and Trazimera • Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) (Kadcyla) • Fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (Enhertu) • Lapatinib (Tykerb) • Margetuximab-cmkb (Margenza) • Neratinib (Nerlynx) • Tucatinib (Tukysa) • Phesgo as a substitute for combination therapy of trastuzumab with pertuzumab Mastectomy Surgery is an operation or procedure to remove cancer from the body. A mastectomy removes all or part of the breast. Inflammatory breast cancer is often treated with a modified radical mastectomy.
3218	MSI-H/dMMR mutation Microsatellites are short, repeated strings of DNA. When errors or defects occur, they are fixed by mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. Some cancers have DNA mutations or changes that prevent these errors from being fixed. This is called microsatellite instability (MSI) or deficient mismatch repair (dMMR). When cancer cells have more than a normal number of microsatellites, it is called MSI-H (microsatellite instability-high). This is often due to dMMR genes. PD-L1 testing Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is an immune protein. If this protein is expressed on the surface of cancer cells, it can cause your immune cells to ignore the cancer and suppress the anti-tumor immune response. If your cancer expresses this protein, you might have treatment that combines chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. This is designed to activate your immune system to better fight off the cancer cells. Tumor HPV testing Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer.
3219	When B cells within germinal centers grow out of control, it can form FL. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein that specifically targets infections or cancer cells and recruits other parts of the immune system. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, cancer, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. Follicular lymphoma starts in mature B cells. Follicular lymphoma Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a slow-dividing, slow-growing B-cell lymphoma that typically forms tumors in lymph nodes. However, FL can form tumors in other parts of the body such as the bone marrow. This is called extranodal (outside of the lymph node) disease. Not everyone with FL needs treatment right away. How does FL develop? In lymph nodes, temporary germinal centers (GCs) form in response to an immune stressor such as infection or inflammation. This is normal. But, when cells within germinal centers grow without proper regulation, it can develop into FL. In FL, excess amounts of abnormal B lymphocytes group together to form clusters (follicles) in the lymph nodes.
3220	Natural killer (NK) cells have granules (small particles) with enzymes that can kill tumor cells or cells infected with a virus. Primary cutaneous lymphomas Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) or lymphomas of the skin are a rare group of NHLs. PCL is not a type of skin cancer. Skin cancer develops from skin cells. PCL develops from abnormal B or T lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell. There are 2 types of PCL: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas Cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) develops from abnormal B cells. B cells produce antibodies that are used to attack invading bacteria, viruses, and toxins. The antibody molecules latch onto and destroy invading viruses or bacteria. CBCL often appears as nodules under the skin that might look like small pimples called papules. Main types include: Primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), also called PCMZ lymphoproliferative disorder Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PC-DLBCL, leg type) Most primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCLs) are indolent or slow-growing.
3221	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
3222	Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy.
3223	You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils. This gives the eye doctor a better view inside your eyes. The eye doctor will use the lamp’s bright light to examine the retina, optic nerve, and other parts of your eyes. If the vitreous looks unusual or you have visual symptoms, you may need a biopsy of the vitreous. For this procedure (called CNS lymphoma in the eye Primary CNS lymphoma can occur in the brain, the spinal cord, and sometimes in the eyes. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination. Here, an ophthalmologist uses a special microscope called a slit lamp to take a close-up look at a patient’s eye. a vitrectomy), your eye is first numbed with anesthetic. Then a thin needle is inserted into the eye. The needle removes a tiny amount of vitreous, which is then tested for cancer cells. In some cases, a vitrectomy alone can confirm the diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma without the need for brain biopsy. Lumbar puncture A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing.
3224	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
3225	Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues.
3226	You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils. This gives the eye doctor a better view inside your eyes. The eye doctor will use the lamp’s bright light to examine the retina, optic nerve, and other parts of your eyes. If the vitreous looks unusual or you have visual symptoms, you may need a biopsy of the vitreous. For this procedure (called CNS lymphoma in the eye Primary CNS lymphoma can occur in the brain, the spinal cord, and sometimes in the eyes. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination. Here, an ophthalmologist uses a special microscope called a slit lamp to take a close-up look at a patient’s eye. a vitrectomy), your eye is first numbed with anesthetic. Then a thin needle is inserted into the eye. The needle removes a tiny amount of vitreous, which is then tested for cancer cells. In some cases, a vitrectomy alone can confirm the diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma without the need for brain biopsy. Lumbar puncture A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing.
3227	Although many people with primary CNS lymphoma have only one visible tumor, others have multiple tumors on their scan. Testing after diagnosis also checks for signs of cancer in the eyes, cerebrospinal fluid, blood, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and possibly the bone marrow and testicles. These tests include: Eye exam Your eyes are connected directly to the brain by the optic nerves. So primary CNS lymphoma doesn’t travel far to spread from the brain to the eyes. (Very rarely it starts in the eyes and spreads to the brain.) If lymphoma occurs in the eye, it often forms in the back of the eye, called the retina. The retina converts what you see into signals, which it sends through the optic nerves to the brain. Lymphoma cells can also invade the vitreous, the clear gel that fills the eye. When primary CNS lymphoma involves the eyes, it’s called vitreoretinal lymphoma. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye exam. This is done at an eye doctor’s office using a slit lamp, a microscope with a bright light. You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils.
3228	You’ll first be given drops in your eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils. This gives the eye doctor a better view inside your eyes. The eye doctor will use the lamp’s bright light to examine the retina, optic nerve, and other parts of your eyes. If the vitreous looks unusual or you have visual symptoms, you may need a biopsy of the vitreous. For this procedure (called CNS lymphoma in the eye Primary CNS lymphoma can occur in the brain, the spinal cord, and sometimes in the eyes. Everyone diagnosed with primary CNS lymphoma should have a thorough eye examination. Here, an ophthalmologist uses a special microscope called a slit lamp to take a close-up look at a patient’s eye. a vitrectomy), your eye is first numbed with anesthetic. Then a thin needle is inserted into the eye. The needle removes a tiny amount of vitreous, which is then tested for cancer cells. In some cases, a vitrectomy alone can confirm the diagnosis of primary CNS lymphoma without the need for brain biopsy. Lumbar puncture A lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap) is a procedure that removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing.
3229	Cancer is named and treated based on the tumor location or where the cancer started. Cancer can occur in the: Mouth (oral cavity), Middle part of the throat near the mouth (oropharynx), Space behind the nose (nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses), Upper part of the throat near the nasal cavity (nasopharynx), Voice box (larynx), or Lower part of the throat behind the larynx (hypopharynx). Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN or HNSCC) is the most common type of head and neck cancer. It forms in the thin, flat cells of the mucus membranes of the mouth (oral), nose (nasal), and throat (pharynx). Mucus is a thick, slippery fluid. Squamous cells are found throughout the body, including the skin. It is strongly recommended, when possible, for those with head and neck cancer to be treated at a high-volume center or hospital that has experience in their type of cancer. More information on mouth cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer can be found at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Throat cancer Throat cancer starts in the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of throat cancer and is the focus of this book.
3230	Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms. They are often found by imaging tests done for a different reason. Symptoms of a larger nodule could include: A visible lump in the neck Neck pain Voice changes Trouble breathing Problems swallowing Who is at risk? Those assigned female at birth are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with a thyroid cancer compared to those assigned male at birth. Compared to other cancers, thyroid cancer is often diagnosed earlier in adulthood. It is the most common cancer in adults aged 18 to 33 years. For more information on cancer in this group, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Adolescent and Young Adult Cancer at NCCN. org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Anything that increases the chances of developing a disease is called a risk factor. The most well-known risk factors for thyroid cancer are described next. Most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factors.
3231	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
3232	Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Carney complex Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Hereditary paragangliomapheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome Li-Fraumeni syndrome Lynch syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) Some of these conditions can also put one at risk for developing a kidney tumor. For more information, read the NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Kidney Cancer, available at NCCN. org/patientguidelines. Key points Adrenal glands are small, yellow glands that are important to the body’s endocrine system. h The endocrine system is made up of tissues and organs that produce hormones. Hormones are chemical substances that are made in one part of the body and are carried through the bloodstream to other parts of the body where they help control how organs or cells work. Adrenal tumors are tumors that can be found in the adrenal glands in one or both adrenal glands. Most tumors found on the adrenal glands are benign (not cancer).
3233	Those with testicles Cancer and cancer treatment can damage sperm. Therefore, use contraception (birth control) such as condoms to prevent pregnancy during and immediately after cancer treatment. p16 (HPV) testing For throat cancer, biopsy samples are tested for the p16 protein to see if human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and expected treatment results, and is considered when making treatment decisions. Cancers that are linked to HPV tend to respond better to treatment. p16 testing is different than HPV testing. p16 is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection because p16 usually increases in cancer cells when HPV is present. HPV Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of viruses that infect the cells on the surface of skin or on the moist surfaces or inner linings of some organs and body cavities, such as the cervix, vagina, vulva, penis, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer.
3234	HPV infection usually clears on its own. However, HPV infections can cause abnormal tissue growth (warts) and sometimes cancer. Cancer caused by HPV is called HPV-related cancer. HPV is the main cause of squamous cell carcinomas of the throat (oropharynx), particularly cancers of the tonsils and base of the tongue. HPV type 16 is responsible for 9 out of 10 throat cancers. The remaining cancers are caused by HPV18, 33, and HPV-positive throat cancer is a distinct disease with specific tumor features that can be targeted during treatment. p16 HPV16 is detected using a test to look for p is a protein that slows cell division. It is produced by a gene located on chromosome 9 (shown as 9p3). Human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes or 46 chromosomes in total. Testing to look for the presence (expression) of p16 is called biomarker testing. p16 can be found in cancers such as throat, cervical, vulvar, melanoma, and esophageal. When too much (overexpression) of p16 is found in throat cancer, it means that the cancer is usually caused by HPV. It might be written as , , , or p16 (HPV)-positive. However, cancer can be p16-.
3235	HPV infection Almost all cervical cancers are caused by long-term infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV is an extremely common sexually transmitted infection (STI). Most sexually active people have or had HPV at one point. Most are unaware that they are or were infected. In most people, the immune system gets rid of (“clears”) HPV from the body. In other people, the virus causes long-term cell changes that develop into cancer. The progression to cancer often occurs decades after the initial infection. Experts are still learning why one person gets cervical cancer and another does not. Other types of cancer caused by HPV include anal, head and neck, penile, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. There are more than 100 types (strains) of HPV. Infection with some strains is more likely to lead to cancer. High-risk forms include HPV16 and HPV-Other HPV types can cause abnormal skin growths, called warts, to form on the anus, genitals, or other areas of the body. A vaccine that protects against 9 different strains of HPV, including the highest-risk strains, is available in the United States.
3236	Types of chemotherapy There are many types of chemotherapy used to treat AML. Often chemotherapies are combined. This is called multi-agent chemotherapy or a multi-agent regimen. Each chemotherapy works in a different way and causes different side effects. Talk to your care team about the types of chemotherapy you will be given, when you will get them, and what side effects to expect. Antimetabolites Antimetabolites prevent the building blocks of DNA from being used. Examples include: Cladribine (Mavenclad) Clofarabine (Clolar) Cytarabine (Ara-C) Fludarabine Methotrexate Anthracyclines Anthracyclines damage and disrupt the making of DNA causing cell death of both cancerous and non-cancerous cells. Some anthracyclines can cause heart issues. They may not be an option for you. There is a limit to how much you can receive in your lifetime. Anthracycline examples include daunorubicin, idarubicin (Idamycin PFS), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Dual-drug liposome of cytarabine and daunorubicin (CPX-351 or Vyxeos) includes an antimetabolite and an anthracycline. Cytarabine Cytarabine is an anthracycline. Cytarabine (also called Ara-C) is used in many treatment regimens. It might be used alone or in combination with other drugs. It might be given as a single dose to reduce a very high white blood cell count.
3237	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
3238	Ducts carry breast milk from the lobules to the nipple. Breast cancer often starts in the ducts or lobules and then spreads into the surrounding tissue. In inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. This causes the breast to look red and swollen and feel warm to the touch. For weeks my bra had been feeling uncomfortably tight. I tried to ignore it but then felt sharp, shooting pains and the skin looked 'funny.' It took multiple office visits and finally to a surgeon to learn I had inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). a nurse and didn't know you could have breast cancer without a lump." 2 Testing for IBC 20 21 21 23 24 25 Test results General health tests Fertility (all genders) Preventing pregnancy during treatment Blood tests Imaging tests Biopsy Hormone receptor status HER2 status Biomarker testing Genetic risk testing Distress screening Key points Treatment planning starts with testing. This chapter presents an overview of the tests you might receive and what to expect. IBC can be difficult to diagnose. Often, there is no lump that can be felt during a breast exam or seen on a mammogram.
3239	You may be given a sedative (medicine) to help you relax. In some cases, MRI may be used to look for cancer in the abdomen, especially the liver. This may be the case if you can't have the contrast agent used for a CT scan. MRI An MRI can show how deep into the rectal wall the cancer has grown and whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. A gel may be inserted into the rectum before MRI imaging. A light coil device or blanket will be placed on top of you. It sends and receives radio waves to record the images. The device covers your body from below your chest to the top of your legs. Straps may be used to help you stay in place. You may feel a bit warm during the scan. Endorectal ultrasound While a pelvic MRI is preferred for imaging rectal cancer, an endorectal ultrasound (EUS) is sometimes performed instead. Using sound waves, this test can also show the extent of cancer in the pelvis. A small probe is inserted into the rectum. Echoes form a picture that can be seen by your doctor on a screen.
3240	Breast cancer Breast cancer starts in the cells of the breast. Almost all breast cancers are a subtype called carcinomas. Carcinomas are cancers that start in the cells that line the inner or outer surfaces of the body. There are different types of breast carcinoma. The most common types are either ductal or lobular. Ductal carcinoma starts in the cells that line the milk ducts. Milk ducts are thin tubes that carry milk from the lobules of the breast to the nipple. It is the most common type of breast cancer. Lobular carcinoma starts in the lobules (milk glands) of the breast. It is the second most common type of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer Most inflammatory breast cancers (IBCs) are invasive ductal carcinomas. This means that cancer started in the cells that line the milk ducts and has spread into surrounding tissue. It’s important not to dismiss any strange skin changes to the breast, including redness, swollen nipple area, or warmth to the touch. Seek medical attention right away.
3241	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
3242	They are similar but the FIGO system is used most often. In the FIGO system, the cancer stage is defined by 3 main areas of cancer growth: The extent of the first (primary) tumor The spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes The spread of cancer to distant sites Ovarian cancer stages are numbered from 1 to Doctors write cancer stages as I, II, III, and IV. The stages are also divided into smaller groups, called substages. This helps to describe the extent of cancer in more detail. The FIGO stages of ovarian cancer are described on the following pages. Cancers of the same stage tend to have similar outcomes. Early-stage cancers tend to have better outcomes than more advanced cancers. Other factors not used for staging, such as your general health, are also important. Stage 1A Cancer is in one ovary. The outer sac (capsule) of the ovary is intact. There is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovary. No cancer cells are found in ascites or washings. Stage 1B Cancer is in both ovaries. The capsules are intact and there is no cancer on the outside surface of the ovaries.
3243	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
3244	Lymph tissue includes lymph vessels and lymph nodes. Lymphocytes help fight and prevent infection. There are 3 main types of lymphocytes: h B lymphocytes or B cells make antibodies. An antibody is a protein. T lymphocytes or T cells help fight infections, kill tumor cells, and control immune responses. Natural killer (NK) cells can kill tumor cells or virus-infected cells. ALL most often affects B cells or T cells. What is blood? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of blood cancer. Blood is a tissue. A tissue is a group of cells that work together to perform a function. There are 4 main components of blood—plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Blood’s function is to move oxygen and nutrients throughout your body and carry away waste. Blood also plays an important role for the immune system and in preventing bleeding. Types of blood cells Your blood contains different types of cells that float in plasma. Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water.
3245	This procedure is sometimes referred to as muscle flap reconstruction. If the bladder is removed An ileal (incontinent) conduit is one type of urinary diversion. After the bladder is removed, your surgeon will create a new tube from a piece of intestine (ileum). This tube will allow your kidneys to drain. Your urine will now exit the body through a small opening called a stoma. A small disposable bag attached to the outside of your abdomen collects the urine. This is called an ostomy bag or ostomy pouch. The bag stays attached to your body with the help of an adhesive part called a “wafer.” The wafer sticks to the skin and acts as a watertight barrier. Another way urine may be redirected after removing the bladder is a continent urinary diversion. It is also referred to as an artificial bladder or “Indiana pouch.” This method uses a segment of intestine to create a pouch to hold urine. The pouch has a channel for urine to pass through made from intestine that connects it to the wall of the abdomen. A stoma is made in the abdominal wall at the location of the reservoir.
3246	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
3247	Others may not appear until long after treatment is over. Many anal cancer survivors experience problems with bowel, urinary, and sexual function. Bowel and bladder changes Radiation to the anus can cause tissue damage. Over time, scar tissue may form that affects how the anal muscles work. The most commonly reported changes in bowel habits include: An inability to control bowel movements (fecal incontinence) Increase in bowel movements Gas (flatulence) Urgent need to pass stool (fecal urgency) Watery stool Urinary incontinence (the inability to hold urine in the bladder) and urgency are also possible after radiation therapy for anal cancer. There are ways to control or lessen these symptoms. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine can help with frequent and watery bowel movements, as it thickens stool. Optimize your diet Changing your diet can help with bowel problems, including frequency, urgency, and fecal incontinence. Eating foods high in insoluble (not soluble) fiber and taking fiber supplements can help. Psyllium-based products (Metamucil, for example) may help slow and thicken the stool. Ask your treatment team for a list of foods that may help with bowel changes after anal cancer treatment, as well as a list of foods to avoid.
3248	Cone biopsy A cone biopsy removes a coneshaped section of the cervix that includes the transformation zone. Cone biopsy may be the only treatment needed for some earlystage cervical cancers. Health history and physical exam To help plan treatment, expect your doctor to ask about your past and current health, including: Illnesses, diseases, and surgeries Medicines that you take (prescription or over-the-counter) Your lifestyle (your diet, activity level, whether you smoke or drink alcohol) Possible symptoms of cervical cancer, such as watery vaginal discharge Your doctor will also do a physical exam of your body, which may include: Checking your vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature) and overall appearance Feeling and/or listening to the organs in your abdomen, including your liver and stomach h A pelvic examination to check the size, position, and appearance of your cervix and uterus It is important to let your doctor know if you have trouble with pelvic exams due to pain, anxiety, or other reasons. Blood tests The following blood tests may be ordered as part of initial testing.
3249	Dying cells release LDH into blood. Fastgrowing cells, such as tumor cells, also release LDH. Liver function tests Liver function tests (LFTs) look at the health of the liver by measuring chemicals that are made or processed by the liver. Levels that are too high or low signal that the liver is not working well or the bile ducts might be blocked. B12 and folic acid Vitamin B12 and folic acid (folate) help the body make new proteins. They are needed for normal red blood cell (RBC) and white blood cell (WBC) formation. B12 and folic acid levels will be monitored. You may be given vitamin supplements, if needed. Iron Iron is important in maintaining body functions such as producing hemoglobin, the molecule in your blood that carries oxygen. You might be monitored for low levels of iron called iron deficiency. You may be given an intravenous (IV) iron supplement, if needed. It is possible to have too much iron in the body called overload. Therefore, only take what is prescribed by your doctor. Blood clotting tests Your body stops bleeding by turning blood into a gel-like form. The gel-like blood forms into a solid mass called a blood clot.
3250	Fatigue may begin after the treatment has finished and last for several weeks. Most of these symptoms can be controlled by medications during treatment. Radiation therapy may be more likely to damage the nervous system than chemotherapy, especially in older adults. Months or years after WBRT, patients may develop memory problems, slowed thinking, and trouble speaking. Fine motor skills, such as handwriting or tying shoes, may also be affected. Talk to your treatment team about the benefits of radiation therapy compared with the risk of nervous system damage, including long-term problems with cognition. Radiation therapy for the eyes Radiation therapy is also used to treat primary CNS lymphoma in the eyes. WBRT can be expanded to include the eyes. Or the radiation can be focused only on the eyes but at a lower dose. With either method, usually both eyes are treated at the same time. Possible side effects include vision problems that may be temporary or permanent. Radiation therapy may cause cataracts, for instance, which can be treated with a routine operation by an eye surgeon. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy.
3251	BPH is much more common than prostate cancer. It’s difficult to tell the difference between the two conditions based on symptoms alone. Be sure to tell your health care providers if you have any of these symptoms: Urinating frequently, especially at night Weak or intermittent urine stream Trouble urinating or straining to urinate Trouble holding in urine Feeling like your bladder hasn’t fully emptied Dull pain in your groin or pelvis Erectile dysfunction (difficulty getting an erection) or painful ejaculation Where does the prostate fit in? The prostate is located deep inside the lower body. It makes semen and is important for sexual reproduction. Prostate: A gland in the male reproductive system. A gland is an organ that makes fluids or chemicals the body needs. The prostate gland makes a protein (prostate-specific antigen, or PSA) that nourishes and helps transmit semen. The prostate also contains muscles that help propel semen through the urethra during ejaculation. Semen: A fluid made up of liquids from the prostate and the seminal vesicles as well as sperm from the testicles. During ejaculation, semen is released from the body through the urethra and out through the penis.
3252	Your doctor can find the right dose of thyroid hormone for you by checking the TSH level and adjusting the dose as needed. Too much levothyroxine can cause health problems, including: Weakened bones Heart rhythm problems Having too much thyroid hormone (thyrotoxicosis) Calcium and vitamin D Your provider may recommend taking calcium and vitamin D supplements to help strengthen your bones. Treatment team Treating thyroid cancer takes a team of experts. Your care team may include an endocrinologist, radiologist, nuclear medicine specialist, surgeon, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist. You and your team will decide on a treatment plan that is best for you. This written course of action covers every phase of the treatment process. Radioactive iodine Radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy uses a form of radioactive iodine (iodine-131) to selectively kill thyroid cancer cells that take up (“eat”) iodine. The goal is to target only the thyroid cells in the neck (both cancer cells and any remaining normal thyroid cells) and elsewhere in the body while sparing healthy cells and tissues.
3253	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
3254	Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is another treatment for primary CNS lymphoma that can be combined with chemotherapy. Targeted therapy drugs attack specific parts of cancer cells to kill these cells or to slow their growth and spread. Side effects of targeted therapy Because targeted therapy aims at cancer cells while mostly avoiding healthy cells, it may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy. Some common side effects include allergic reactions, fever, chills, muscle aches, fatigue, weakness, infections, nausea, and diarrhea. These medications may also reduce the number of blood-clotting cells (platelets) in the body, increasing the risk of bruising and bleeding. Medicines are available during treatment to help reduce most of these side effects. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy uses your body’s immune system—your natural defense against infection and disease—to fight cancer. Immunotherapy treats cancer cells throughout the body. The main immunotherapy drug used for primary CNS lymphoma is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is a type of immunotherapy called a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies hunt for specific proteins on the surface of cancer cells. Cancerous blood cells (and some healthy blood cells) have a protein on their surface called CDRituximab finds and attaches itself to CD20 proteins.
3255	Common symptoms include: Headaches – Headaches are very common and often the first symptom in people with a glioma. Headaches can be worse in the morning, wake you up in the middle of the night, and occur with nausea and vomiting. Seizures – Seizures are also frequent in people with brain tumors. Seizures are often an early sign of a glioma, especially in low-grade gliomas. Fatigue – Fatigue is another common symptom of a glioma. Fatigue can be debilitating, frequent, emotionally overwhelming, and not related to how much sleep you get or how much activity you do. However, physical activity or exercise can sometimes help. Nausea and vomiting – Nausea and vomiting can be caused by the tumor putting increased pressure on the brain. Problems with thinking and speech – Examples include confusion, memory loss, and speech difficulties. Weakness or problems moving – People with a brain tumor may have muscle weakness on one side of the body, or difficulty with walking or balance. Changes in personality or mood – Changes in behavior, mood, and personality can occur in people whose tumors are located in parts of the brain that control mood and personality. Other symptoms also sometimes occur.
3256	A thin piece of tissue called the isthmus connects the lobes. The thyroid makes hormones. These substances are essential for the body to function properly. They circulate in the blood and help regulate body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, weight, and metabolism (how fast food becomes fuel for your body). The two main hormones made by the thyroid are thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Together, these are often referred to simply as “thyroid hormone.” The thyroid uses a mineral from your diet called iodine to produce these hormones. Certain foods and iodized salt contain iodine. There are four pea-sized glands on the back of the thyroid gland. These parathyroid glands control the amount of calcium in your bloodstream. Thyroid gland The thyroid is a butterflyshaped gland in the lower front part of the neck. It makes hormones that control blood pressure, metabolism, and other body functions. Thyroid nodules Thyroid nodules are small, often round areas of abnormal growth within the thyroid gland. Most are not cancerous. Very small nodules usually can't be seen or felt. Your provider may be able to see or feel a large nodule while examining your lower neck. Most thyroid nodules don't cause symptoms.
3257	However, if the cancer has spread beyond the adrenal glands, cure becomes less likely. Treatment can be used to delay progression or recurrence. Signs and symptoms Half of those with adrenal cancer will have symptoms caused by hormones produced by the tumor. Others may experience symptoms if the tumor has grown so large that it is pressing on nearby organs. If you have any of the signs or symptoms listed below, make sure to discuss them with your health care provider. Symptoms of adrenal cancer may include: Weight gain Muscle weakness Pink or purple stretch marks on the skin Hormonal changes such as excess facial hair, hair loss on the head, irregular periods, enlarged breast tissue, and shrinking testicles Nausea Vomiting Abdominal bloating Back pain Fever Loss of appetite Loss of weight without trying Risk factors There are no known causes for most adrenal tumors. However, some genetic (hereditary) conditions can put you at risk for developing an adrenal tumor. Hereditary conditions are mutations passed down from biological parent to child through genes. Those with one of the conditions listed below might have a higher risk for developing an adrenal tumor. This accounts for only a small portion of cases.
3258	Swollen lymph nodes can occur anywhere in the body but are most often in the neck, armpit, and groin area and in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis on imaging scans. FL symptoms can include fever, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss. These symptoms are referred to as B symptoms. Not everyone has the same symptoms. Test results Accurate testing is needed to diagnose and treat FL. Results from blood tests, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy, and imaging studies will be used to guide your treatment plan. It is important you understand what these tests mean. Ask questions about your test results. Online patient portals are one way to access your test results, but may also contain communication between members of your health care team and other information that might need explaining. Please wait to discuss all test results with your doctor or health care team so you have a complete and accurate understanding of the results. Keep these things in mind: It's beneficial to have a support system in place during diagnosis and treatment. Enlist the help of friends, family members, or peers who can provide transportation, meals, and emotional support.
3259	The following TNM staging information is used for squamous cell carcinoma that tested negative for p16 or was not tested. For p16- (HPV-) cancer stages, see Guide Tumor A tumor can grow into nearby structures. Head and neck tumors are measured in centimeters (cm). A baseball is 7 cm, a golf ball is 4 cm, and a pea is 1 cm. Tis – Carcinoma in situ T1 – Tumor is 2 cm or smaller T2 – Tumor is between 2 and 4 cm T3 – Tumor is larger than 4 cm or has grown in to the epiglottis flap that closes the airway to the trachea) T4a – Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades the larynx, extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or mandible. T4b – Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades lateral pterygoid muscle, pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases carotid artery. About ALL What is ALL? What are lymphocytes? What is blood? What's in this book? What can you do to get the best care? Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer diagnosed in children. It is a fastgrowing cancer that starts in lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell.
3260	AML often causes low counts of healthy blood cells, but it can also present with a high number of abnormal, malignant (abnormal) white blood cells. There are several types of white blood cells. A differential counts the number of each type of white blood cell. It also checks if the counts are in balance with each other. This test may show a high number of blasts in the blood. Your care team will pay particular attention to the following CBC measurements: Hemoglobin (Hgb) is a measurement of how much oxygen can move through blood and if a red blood cell transfusion might be needed. Platelets (PLTs) are cells that make the clot, thus preventing or stopping the bleeding. h An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) measures cells that fight bacteria and protect us from infections Blasts or leukemia cells can sometimes be detected in the blood and usually are reported as a percentage of cells. Comprehensive metabolic panel A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) measures substances in your blood. It provides important information about how well your kidneys and liver are working, among other things. Creatinine Creatinine is a waste produced in the muscles.
3261	Plasma is a clear, yellowish fluid made up of mostly water. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices. NCCN Guidelines for Patients are trusted by patients and providers. They clearly explain current care recommendations made by respected experts in the field. Recommendations are based on the latest research and practices at leading cancer centers. Cancer care is not the same for everyone. By following expert recommendations for your situation, you are more likely to improve your care and have better outcomes as a result. Use this book as your guide to find the information you need to make important decisions. There are 3 types of blood cells: Red blood cells (RBCs or erythrocytes) carry oxygen throughout the body. White blood cells (WBCs or leukocytes), which include granulocytes, monocytes, and lymphocytes, fight infections. Platelets (PLTs or thrombocytes) help control bleeding. In CML, there are usually too many white blood cells (granulocytes). Sometimes, there are too few or too many platelets, as well. Chronic means this cancer worsens slowly. Granulocytes include: Neutrophils Eosinophils Basophils How are blood cells formed?
3262	This is known as Marjolin’s ulcer. CSCC that starts in damaged, inflamed, or scarred skin is difficult to treat and more likely to come back after treatment. Actinic keratoses An actinic keratosis is an area of scaly or rough skin caused by exposure to the sun over time that may become squamous cell skin cancer. Actinic keratoses vary in appearance, and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. They may appear as small scaly spots (lesions) or stick out from the skin like bumps. Some may even look like warts. Having actinic keratoses means you are at increased risk of developing squamous cell skin cancer. It is important that you have your skin looked at by a doctor or dermatologist. Actinic keratosis on the hand An actinic keratosis is an area of rough skin caused by being in the sun over time. Actinic keratosis on top of head Actinic keratoses can vary in appearance and may be red, white, tan, or pink in color. Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer.
3263	Imaging Imaging means taking detailed pictures (images) of the insides of the body. The images can show the size, location, and other features of cancer. Imaging can reveal where the cancer started and whether the cancer has spread (metastasized). After your scan, your images will be studied by a radiologist. A radiologist is a doctor who’s an expert in interpreting imaging tests. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor or care team. This information helps to plan the next steps of your care. Your doctor or other health care provider will discuss the results with you. Be sure to ask any questions you have. Is blue light cystoscopy better? Cystoscopy commonly uses a white light to see inside the bladder. Some newer cystoscopes now use a blue light. When combined with a special dye injected into the bladder, blue light cystoscopy can identify tumors a little more distinctly than white light. Another technology called narrow-band imaging also helps detect tumors more clearly during cystoscopy but doesn’t require a dye.
3264	Genetic factors When cancer “runs in the family,” genetic testing can be done to find specific genetic changes (mutations) known to be linked with prostate cancer and other cancers. For instance, having an inherited genetic change in the BRCA2 gene increases the risk of getting prostate cancer. There are also genetic abnormalities that don’t run in families and aren’t inherited. Race In the United States, Black males are more likely than white males to develop prostate cancer. Prostate cancer in Black males is also more likely to occur at an earlier age and be more aggressive and more advanced when diagnosed. Black males are also twice as likely to die from prostate cancer compared to white males. Hispanic and Asian males are less likely than both white and Black males to be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Several things contribute to these differences, such as barriers to accessing health care (including early detection screening), as well as biological and genetic factors, and other causes. Researchers are trying to understand the reasons for these differences and what can be done to improve outcomes. What does aggressive mean?
3265	Radiation therapy Radiation therapy (RT) uses high-energy radiation from x-rays, photons, protons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation therapy can be given alone or before or after surgery to treat or slow the growth of cancer. Sometimes, radiation is given with certain systemic therapies. It may be used as supportive care to help ease pain or discomfort caused by cancer. Most types of radiation include several short treatment Modified radical mastectomy The dotted line shows where the entire breast and some lymph nodes are removed. Part of the chest wall muscle may also be removed. sessions that are given once daily over a few days to weeks. Ask your care team which radiation option(s) are best for you and what side effects to expect. Radiation may be given to the chest wall, infraclavicular region (below the collarbone), supraclavicular area (above the collarbone), or lymph nodes found in the axillary bed (armpit). Lymph node radiation therapy is also called regional nodal irradiation (RNI) External beam radiation therapy External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) uses a machine outside of the body called a linear accelerator (linac) to aim radiation at the whole breast (WBRT) and lymph nodes (RNI).
3266	Thyrogen activates iodine uptake so that hormone replacement can be continued therapy and imaging. Possible side effects of RAI therapy include: Neck pain or swelling in glands near the jaw Nausea and vomiting Dry mouth or eyes Watery eyes Change in taste or smell The dose of RAI therapy is often adjusted for children with thyroid cancer and people on dialysis for kidney disease. If any cancer can be removed by surgery, this will be considered before starting RAI therapy. Safety measures The radiation will exit your body through urine and other body fluids. This means that your body will give off small amounts of radiation after treatment. For a short time, you will need to take safety measures around others, especially children and pregnant people. Whole-body RAI scan After RAI, a whole-body radioiodine scan is performed to look for remaining thyroid tissue and “hidden” areas of thyroid cancer in the body. At some treatment centers, a wholebody scan is also done before RAI therapy. This imaging can be done using small doses of iodine-131 or a similar form of radioactive iodine called iodine- Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy small areas of cancer.
3267	and feeling very tired or weak (fatigue). Additional side effects are also possible. Medicines are available during chemotherapy treatment to help control most of these side effects. Read more about nausea and vomiting side effects in NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Nausea and Vomiting, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Radiation therapy Before effective chemotherapy became available to treat primary CNS lymphoma, radiation therapy was the most commonly used treatment. It’s still an option for treating primary CNS lymphoma in people who can’t have chemotherapy in the first phase of treatment (induction). Another situation in which radiation is sometimes used is in the second phase of treatment (consolidation) to kill cancer cells left over after induction treatment. Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or other radiation to kill cancer cells. Like x-rays used for imaging, you won’t see or feel anything during treatment. The total dose of radiation is usually divided into small doses given over several weeks. By giving a little every day, the radiation damages the tumor while better preserving the healthy tissue. The most commonly used radiation technique for primary CNS lymphoma is treatment of the entire brain, called whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT).
3268	This is called renal cell carcinoma (RCC). About 9 out of 10 kidney cancers are RCCs. RCC may appear as multiple tumors in one kidney or involve both kidneys. Because it is the most common type, RCC is often simply referred to as kidney cancer. RCC is the focus of this book. There are other, less common cancers that can arise in the kidney. While they can sometimes be confused with RCC, it is important to note that they are treated differently. Urothelial carcinoma starts in the cells that line the renal pelvis and ureter that drain the kidney. While these tumors can be found up the ureter near the kidneys, they are not kidney tumors. These tumors share many features with bladder cancer. These tumors used to be called transitional call cancer. For more information, see NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Bladder Cancer, available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines and on the NCCN Patient Guides for Cancer app. Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) usually occurs in young children. In Wilms tumor (WT), cancer cells are found in the kidney. Renal sarcoma starts in the blood vessels or connective tissue of the kidney.
3269	Where can I find help to pay for tests? Who will talk with me about the next steps and when? 3 Bone cancer staging Overview How is bone formed? TNM scores Numbered stages Key points Questions to ask Cancer staging is used to help make treatment decisions. It describes the size and location of the tumor, and if cancer has spread to lymph nodes, organs, or other parts of the body. This chapter provides a general overview of cancer staging. Overview There are many staging systems. Most staging systems include information about: Where the tumor is located in the body The size of the tumor Whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes Whether the cancer has spread to a different part of the body Tumor grade, which refers to how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope How is bone formed? Bone is a living tissue made of cells (osteocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts), calcium, phosphate, hydroxyapatite (a bone mineral), and collagen. New bone formation, known as ossification, starts in the womb and ends during adolescence, between 10 and 19 years of age. Ossification is complete when the skeleton is done growing.
3270	If you need any dental work or procedures, it might be recommended before starting certain treatments. Distress screening It is normal to have strong feelings about being diagnosed with cancer and your feelings can also change from day to day and week to week. Talk to your care team and those whom you feel most comfortable about how you are feeling. There are services and people who can help you. Support and counseling are available. Many treatment teams include mind and body therapists who can help. Dealing with a cancer diagnosis can be stressful and may cause further distress. Distress is an unpleasant experience of a mental, physical, social, or spiritual nature. It can affect how you feel, think, and act. Distress might include feelings of sadness, fear, helplessness, worry, anger, and guilt. You may also experience depression, anxiety, and sleep issues. Your treatment team will screen your level of distress. This is part of your cancer care. Your diagnosis of cancer may affect your family or loved ones. They may feel some degree of anxiety or depression. They can talk to the social worker and seek help, too.
3271	Or you and your doctor may agree on a different schedule after discussing your personal risk of recurrence. Imaging Unlike physical exams, imaging is generally not needed at regular intervals for an extended time after treatment. Imaging is typically ordered if you have new or worsening symptoms, or if other findings suggest recurrence or spread. Follow-up imaging is described below according to the cancer stage. Stage 1 If you had radiation or chemoradiation after non–fertility-sparing treatment, or if the cancer is stage 1B3, you may have a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDGPET/CT) scan 3 to 6 months after finishing treatment. The area from the neck to the midthigh is typically scanned. After fertility-sparing treatment, you may have an MRI of your pelvis (with contrast) 6 months after surgery and then yearly for 2 to 3 years. Stages 2, 3, and 4A Imaging is recommended 3 to 6 months after treatment for stage 2, 3, and 4A cervical cancers. An FDG-PET/CT scan is preferred, but a CT with contrast is also a recommended option. The area from the neck to the mid-thigh will be scanned.
3272	This procedure is generally done under general anesthesia. Wound healing after surgery After surgery, there are different ways a wound can heal. Some wounds heal better without stitches. A wound might be left open (rather than being stitched together) and left to heal by itself, filling in and closing up naturally. This is called secondary intention healing. It could mean you will need regular dressings to the area for up to 6 weeks, but the full time to heal depends on the size, depth, and area of the wound. A linear closure is another common form of wound healing. The surgeon will cut a small amount of extra skin to change the shape of the wound from a circle to a fusiform (an oval that looks like a football) to help the surgeon stitch the wound together in a line. Other wounds may need skin grafts or other types of surgery (such as rearranging skin, known as “flapping”) to heal well and lessen scarring. A skin graft is a patch of skin that is removed by surgery from one area of the body and transplanted (attached) to another area.
3273	During and after treatment, your treatment team will monitor you for weight loss and other signs you aren’t receiving enough nutrition. If you smoke or vape, seek help to quit A history of smoking or vaping nicotine increases your chances of developing head and neck, lung, and other cancers. Smoking and vaping can limit how well cancer treatment works and prevent wound healing. They also greatly increase your chances of having side effects during and after surgery. Cannabis use might also affect the amount of anesthesia used during surgery. Nicotine is the chemical in tobacco that makes you want to keep smoking and vaping. Nicotine withdrawal is challenging for most people who smoke or vape. The stress of having cancer may make it even harder to quit. If you smoke or vape, ask your care team about counseling and medicines to help you quit. In head and neck cancers, stopping smoking or vaping is essential to maximize the chance for cure and minimize side effects. For online support, try these websites: SmokeFree.gov BeTobaccoFree.gov CDC.gov/tobacco Performance status Performance status (PS) is a person’s general level of fitness and ability to perform daily self-care tasks.
3274	White blood cells help you fight infection. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Platelets help wounds heal by forming blood clots. A chemistry profile (also called a comprehensive metabolic panel), is a group of tests that provides information about how well your kidneys, liver, and other organs are working. CEA blood test Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a protein found in blood. People with colorectal cancer tend to have more than normal. Monitoring CEA can be helpful for some cancers that are only in the rectum. If the level rises, it could signal that the cancer has spread. If the level is high at diagnosis, it could suggest that the cancer has already spread. Monitoring CEA isn't helpful for everyone. Pregnant people and tobacco users may also have more CEA than average in their blood. 66 Write everything down and keep a binder or folder of information. If your loved one wakes up violently ill at midnight, it’s after hours and you need to know who to call. Be prepared before that happens, so you don’t have to scramble in an emergency.
3275	An MRI of your chest or liver may be used to look for signs of cancer spread. MRI doesn’t use radiation. It uses radio waves and powerful magnets to take pictures of areas inside the body. Getting an MRI scan is similar to getting a CT scan but takes longer. Like a CT scan, a contrast agent may be used to make the pictures clearer. You will lie on a table that moves through a large tunnel in the scanning machine. The machine is more enclosed than a CT scan. Tell your care team if you get nervous in enclosed spaces. You may be given a type of medicine called a sedative to help you relax. CT scan A CT scan is a more detailed kind of -ray. It takes a lot of pictures, or images, from different angles. A computer then combines the images to make 3-D pictures. PET CT or MRI are sometimes combined with positron emission tomography (PET). A PET scan shows how your cells are using a simple form of sugar, which can be helpful for identifying cancer. A sugar radiotracer is put into your body through a vein.
3276	a doctor’s office or at a hospital. You may want to ask how the biopsy incision will be closed, as there are several options that can be used. Imaging tests Your doctor may use imaging scans to see if you have cancer beyond the suspiciouslooking lesion, such as in the bone, nerves, or surrounding deep soft tissue. You may have a computed tomography (CT) scan or an MRI. A CT scan is a procedure that uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The pictures are taken from different angles and are used to create 3-dimensional (3-D) views of tissues and organs. An MRI is a procedure that uses radio waves, a powerful magnet, and a computer to make detailed pictures of areas inside the body. For both a CT scan and an MRI, a liquid called a contrast dye may be injected into a vein to help your tissues and organs show up more clearly in the picture.
3277	Have you had any other diseases, such as cancer or stroke? How old were you when each of these diseases and health conditions was diagnosed? What is our family’s ancestry—from what countries did our ancestors originate? Imaging tests Imaging tests take pictures of the inside of your body. A radiologist, an expert in interpreting test images, will write a report and send this report to your doctor. Your test results will be discussed with you. CT scan A computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan uses x-rays and computer technology to take pictures of the inside of the body. It takes many x-rays of the same body part from different angles. All the images are combined to make one detailed three-dimensional (3D) picture. In most cases, contrast will be used. Contrast Contrast materials are not dyes, but substances that help enhance and improve the images of several organs and structures in the body. Contrast is used to make the pictures clearer. It might be taken by mouth (oral) or given through a vein (IV). The contrast is not permanent and will leave the body in your urine after the test.
3278	Genetic syndromes Having certain genetic syndromes means you are at higher risk of getting squamous cell skin cancer. While there are many, these syndromes include: h Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), a condition in which the body isn’t able to repair damage to DNA caused by sunlight. Skin cells with a lot of DNA damage can eventually become skin cancers. Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), a form of a rare, inherited skin disorder that causes the skin to become very fragile. Any trauma to the skin can cause painful blisters. NCCN recommends that people with these or other genetic syndromes should be referred to a cancer center with expertise in CSCC prevention and treatment. NCCN also recommends that those with a genetic risk of skin cancer receive counseling from someone with expertise in cancer genetics throughout the treatment process. This might be a genetic counselor, medical geneticist, endocrinologist, oncologist, surgeon, or an oncology nurse. Weakened immune system When your immune system is weakened, your body has trouble fighting off viruses, bacteria, and fungi. This can lead to infections and other health risks. Having a weakened immune system can put you at risk of squamous cell skin cancer.
3279	Osteosarcoma – starts in cells most commonly in the areas of the bone that grow rapidly (metaphysis), near the growth plates. What is bone? Bone is a living tissue made up of specialized bone cells and collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body. Bone tissue also contains blood vessels, nerves, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. Bone is made up of the following: Compact bone or cortical bone – the hard, dense outer layer of bone that is covered by a membrane of strong connective tissue called the periosteum Spongey bone or cancellous bone – the spongy, porous inner layer of bone that contains red marrow Bone marrow – found in the center of most bones and has many blood vessels There are 2 types of bone marrow: red and yellow. Red marrow contains blood stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Yellow marrow is made mostly of fat. Red marrow is often replaced by yellow marrow as we age. Why you should read this book Making decisions about cancer care can be stressful. You may need to make tough decisions under pressure about complex choices.
3280	Experts recommend eating a healthy diet, especially one that includes a lot of plant-based foods (veggies, fruits, and whole grains). More information For more information on cancer survivorship, the following are available at NCCN.org/patientguidelines: Survivorship Care for Healthy Living Survivorship Care for Cancer-Related Late and Long-Term Effects These resources address many topics relevant to survivors of anal cancer, including: Anxiety, depression, and distress Cognitive dysfunction Fatigue Pain Sexual dysfunction Sleep disorders Healthy lifestyles Immunizations Employment, insurance, and disability concerns Complementary and alternative therapies Complementary and alternative therapies may help with side effects and improve comfort and well-being during and after cancer treatment. Some of these practices and products include: Acupuncture Dietary supplements Eastern medicine Medical marijuana Herbal teas and preparations Homeopathy Hypnosis Meditation Reiki Yoga Massage therapy If you have questions or are curious about complementary therapies, talk to your treatment team. Many cancer centers have integrative oncology programs. Integrative oncology is an approach to cancer care that combines conventional (standard) cancer treatment with complementary and alternative therapies. 4 Making treatment decisions 39 It’s your choice 39 Questions to ask 49 Resources It is important to be comfortable with the cancer treatment you choose.
